Richland County refers to itself, because of its character and geographical location, as the “heart of Ohio.” But for a large number of visitors, it is better known as the home of perhaps the most storied prison in movie history.

Despite seven Oscar nominations, including one for best picture, “The Shawshank Redemption” — starring Tim Robbins as one (very) unfortunate accountant by the name of Andy Dufresne and Morgan Freeman as a convict named Red — barely made back its $25 million budget following its 1994 premiere. But after significant video sales and seemingly endless showings on TNT (151 hours of total televised airtime last year alone), Americans fell in love with the TV equivalent of a houseguest who won’t leave.

But the film, based on a 1982 Stephen King short story, doesn’t just resonate because it’s always on. " ‘Shawshank’ flatters us while still residing in a real, powerful place,” is how Will Leitch, who reviews movies for the sports site Deadspin, explains the story’s staying power. “We imagine ourselves as Andy Dufresne and want to believe we would be as strong as he was. Our daily struggles aren’t nearly as overpowering as his, but he still chooses to live, to survive — that feeling of needing to live that’s universal, and timeless.”

All of this ardor helped boost the recent fortunes of Mansfield, Ashland and Upper Sandusky, Ohio, three towns that share 13 sites that appeared in the movie. (The Tappan Stove Company, Westinghouse and General Motors plants have all closed.)

Tourism has increased every year since “Shawshank” had its premiere; according to the Mansfield/Richland County Convention and Visitors Bureau, the movie brought in more than 18,000 visitors, and produced an estimated $3 million boost to the local economy in 2013. The enthusiasm is so intense that the bureau’s web page now directs drivers to each of the Andy and Red focal points in the form of the newly designated Shawshank Trail while also recommending all the Redemption I.P.A.s, Reformatory Red Wines, Jail House Javas and Shawshank Bundt Cakes they can purchase along the way.

(If one were so inclined, one could consume a Redemption Pizza Pie at Two Cousins’ Pizza, wash it down with a Prison Break Soda at Richland Carrousel Park and then eat a scene from the movie made out of chocolate at Squirrel’s Den, all within a block radius of one another in downtown Mansfield. )

In May I went there to explore, enjoy and eat my way through the county that will celebrate the film’s 20th anniversary Aug. 29 to 31.

“I saw who the real fans of that movie were,” recalled Bob Gunton, the 68-year-old actor who portrayed the evil Warden Samuel Norton, after he paid a visit to the area last summer, “and the movie’s message really connected with them.”

The connection should be apparent on Labor Day weekend when the region will once again double as a town just outside Portland, Me., where an innocent man found freedom, his inmate pal found that “hope is a good thing” and the extremely corrupt head of the prison found ...well, he ended up finding the business end of an office pistol — but that was a good thing for the prisoners.

My first stop was near the entrance to Malabar Farm State Park in Lucas, Ohio, across from one very giving tree (the old oak that marked where Andy buried directions to guide Red toward his post-jailbreak home), while offering the type of scenery and sensibility that Norman Rockwell would just as soon live in as paint.

“The terrain is so completely different south of Mansfield than it is north of the town,” said Mr. Gunton who, as an avid biker, pedaled through much of the landscape when he wasn’t filming. “North is pretty flat, and in the south, there’s quite a bit of elevation. I would have a completely different experience depending on which area I’d ride.”

This 917-acre oasis that is Malabar Farm has been part of the Ohio State Parks system since 1972 and is best known for being the longtime home of the author Louis Bromfield, who won the 1927 Best Novel Pulitzer Prize for “Early Autumn.” But for the purposes of my pilgrimage, it also happens to be across the street from Andy’s solitary oak, within a field that looked, as he told Red, “like something out of a Robert Frost poem.”

Because of a thunderstorm in 2011, the photo op is half the tree it used to be. The overall site (along with a cabin featured in the opening scene where Andy is about to confront his cheating wife with a loaded gun and an empty bottle) is still a nice enough visual, but the real gem is the adjoining park, with Bromfield’s 32-room Western Reserve-style home smack dab in the middle of it all.

The tour included everything from a pair of Grandma Moses paintings (a “thank you” present to Bromfield for writing an introduction to her 1947 autobiogrpahy, “Grandma Moses: American Primitive”) to a walk-through of Humphrey Bogart and Lauren Bacall’s honeymoon suite (Mr. Bogart was a longtime friend of the author’s, and the couple had their 1945 wedding at his home).

“It was funny to go outside my door, while they were filming, and see a sheriff’s car there for security during the tree scene,” said Sondra Hupp, a Malabar tour guide when she isn’t working at a local bird sanctuary. Ms. Hupp also lived next to the property where the director Frank Darabont shot the scene. “That was the first thing that came to my head, thinking there might have been a prison break” from the town’s correctional facility.

The Malabar Farm Restaurant, in an 1820 building within the park, has a reputation for its hamburgers (the restaurant uses beef from cattle raised next door). From there it was off to see the centerpiece of the Shawshank experience, the Ohio State Reformatory, which closed in 1990, four years before the site was immortalized on film.

“The O.S.R. had 80,000 visitors last year,” said the president of the tourism bureau, Lee Tasseff. “The film went from saving it from the wrecking ball to becoming a tourism icon.”

Keith Fischer, a volunteer guide, knows every inch of the 250,000-square-foot fortress, which opened in 1896 and is now a state landmark.

“We’ve got a haunted prison tour happening tonight,” Mr. Fischer said as we walked past walls of rusted-out cells. “Lots of amateur ghost hunters come here, due to the place’s past.”

Much of the film was shot on these grounds, and many of the props remain, including the sewage pipe Andy spent 19 years breaking into, and eventually crawled out of, to freedom.

Other nods to notable plot points within the facility include the other half of the storm-split oak tree propped outside the entrance, and Warden Norton’s office, complete with the safe where he discovered Andy’s nub of a rock hammer in a hollowed-out Bible. Last summer, a group of tourists was lucky enough to bump into the coldhearted disciplinarian himself.

“I was taking the tour,” Mr. Gunton said, “and sat behind the desk right when about 60 people come into the very same room. Immediately the place was lit up with cellphone cameras.

“So I held an impromptu news conference,” he said, “explaining how we shot various scenes, including the warden’s demise, while sitting in that seat, and the logistics that went through that.”

The 118-year-old reformatory, which resembles the Tower of London, is still visited by ex-convicts. “About once a week we’ll get a former inmate in here,” Mr. Fischer said as we made our way through the world’s largest free-standing steel cellblock. “They get some closure. And it gives them some new perspective. They always looked up at the tower. Now they can go up there and look down.”

The next day I drove 46 miles to Upper Sandusky, to pay a visit to the Shawshank Woodshop, the closest thing the area has to a full-on museum devoted to the movie. This was where Red and the rest of his crew heard Andy play Mozart’s “Marriage of Figaro” over the prison sound system and, as Red narrates, “It was like some beautiful bird flapped into our drab little cage and made those walls dissolve away, and for the briefest of moments, every last man in Shawshank felt free.”

The owners of the wood shop, Bill and April Mullen, were smart enough to get in on the film tourism trade earlier than most. As a result, they’ve acquired more artifacts from the movie than can even be found at the reformatory: everything from the novelty prison trays Hollywood attendees used before the premiere at Mansfield’s gorgeous Renaissance Theater to the 1937 Ford bus that Andy arrived in with the rest of the “fresh fish.”

“Morgan Freeman hasn’t said he won’t come in August,” said Mr. Mullen, who became friends with the actor after meeting him in 2012 at the Ground Zero Blues Club, the Clarksdale, Miss., spot that Mr. Freeman co-owns. “We’re holding out hope.” (A representative for Mr. Freeman said the event is currently not on the actor’s schedule.) Mr. Mullen said Mr. Robbins had also been contacted, but his publicist said he’d be out of the country.

“Tim was very soft-spoken, and we were all wondering how anyone was going to hear him on screen,” said Bob Wachtman, a retired Upper Sandusky native and an extra in a scene filmed at the nearby Wyandot County Courthouse, as he walked through the wood shop with Mr. Mullen and me. “Once my shot was done, they never ordered me out of the building, so I just sat there and watched them film the whole day.”

As Mr. Wachtman spoke in almost reverential tones about a small chapter in the town’s history that occurred two decades ago, I thought of the more recent moment when a reformatory guide told me of the fan weddings that the prison hosts and then added, almost as an afterthought, that he too would be getting hitched on the grounds the very next weekend.

Not everyone can schedule on-site nuptials (they start at $1,000), but there are always the souvenir T-shirts reading Property of Ohio State Reformatory. Those go for $15.

IF YOU GO

Where to Stay

Mansfield’s Quality Inn & Suites offers a Shawshank 20th Anniversary Package Aug. 29 to 30 with doubles for $128.66; suites, $139.96 (500 North Trimble Road, 419-529-1000; qualityinn.com).

The Olde Stone House is a pre-Civil War but Wi-Fi-capable B & B on 10 acres just 10 minutes from downtown Mansfield; from $89 to $109 (291 Stewart Road North, 419-571-0013; theoldestonehousebandb.com).

Where to Eat

Martini’s on Main, in Mansfield, offers pizza made from scratch and gets most of its ingredients from local farms (108 North Main Street, 419-775-5936; martinisonmain.net). Closed Sundays.

Rocky’s Pub & Grill (22 South Park Street, 419-522-1342; rockyspub.com) is a nearly 40-year-old Mansfield institution near the Carrousel District that offers up a great selection of steak, seafood and Scotch.

Reformatory Red Wine is available at the Cypress Hill Winery in Mansfield (37 East Fourth Street, 419-295-2124; cypresscellars.com).

What to Do

A two-day bus tour (Aug. 29 and 30) takes visitors to the 13 film locations at $139 per ticket (shawshank20.com).

A ’40s-’50s-themed cocktail party will be held at the Ohio State Reformatory starting at 7:30 p.m. on Aug. 30. The $50 ticket includes hors d’oeuvres, reformatory tours and a live jazz band (Shawshank20.com).