ATHENS — Greek voters — angry, tired and scared — went to the polls on Sunday to vote on a high stakes referendum, which could redefine the country’s place in Europe and shake the Continent’s financial stability.

The poll comes after a week in which voters were barraged with ads that warned that if they did not vote yes, they would soon be without medicine and gasoline.

With Greek banks closed, the nightly news was filled with images of retirees lining up to get only a fraction of their monthly pensions.

Yet it was hard for many Greeks to know exactly what they were voting on. The ballot actually asks them only to say yes or no to the terms of a deal with Greece’s creditors, which is no longer even on the table.

Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras of Greece has told them that rejecting the deal will give him more power to negotiate and urged them to do so. But European and opposition leaders have tried to frame the vote as a yes or no to staying in the eurozone and avoiding economic collapse.

Mr. Tsipras voted late Sunday morning in his working class neighborhood in Athens. Afterward, he said the vote was a “celebration of democracy.”

“Not only will we remain in Europe,” he said. “but we will live with dignity to prosper, to work as equals among equals.”

On a sunny day, voters trickled into polling stations across Greece, often passing tourists in shorts and floppy hats.

For some voters, the week of hardship — they could only withdraw 60 euros, or about $67, a day from A.T.M.’s and already some pharmacists were refusing to fill prescriptions — had only strengthened their sense that Greece needed to stand up for itself.

After five years in which unemployment skyrocketed and the country’s economy collapsed by 25 percent, many said that a no vote was at least a vote for hope, the possibility of a new deal, rather than following the mandates of creditors who had failed to set Greece on course to recovery.

For others, the hardship only proved that Greece, like it or not, was in the hands of its creditors and could do little but take whatever terms were being offered. In many cases, they blamed Mr. Tsipras’s young government for having returned the country to recession when it had shown small signs of recovery just before the January elections.

At a polling place near the archaeological museum in Athens turnout was low, poll workers said. And people coming out of the voting booths seemed split.

“I voted with my heart and also my mind,” said Marie Triadafillou, who works in transportation logistics and voted yes. “I believe when you are in a union you cannot leave. We say in our country if the sheep leaves the flock it cannot live.”

But others felt that the referendum was not about staying in the eurozone but simply part of the long negotiations between Greece and its creditors, which broke off more than a week ago when a frustrated Mr. Tsipras left Brussels and called for the referendum.

Since then, European officials have refused to negotiate further and to extend a deadline for the last bailout program, triggering a decision by the European Central Bank to cap its emergency support to Greek banks. This forced the government to close the banks for fear of extended bank runs.

In Greece, the campaigning for the referendum had to stop on Friday by law. But European leaders seemed to continue their efforts over the weekend.

Martin Schulz, the head of the European Parliament, who had offered at one point to come to Greece to campaign for a yes vote, said on Sunday that Greece would need to prepare to operate without the euro and with a parallel currency if there was a no vote on Sunday. While Greece would remain in the euro, “they will have to introduce another currency after the referendum because the euro is not available as a means of payment,” he said in an interview broadcast Sunday on Germany’s Deutschlandfunk radio. He added that he hoped the risk of such a change would induce Greeks to vote yes.

But some European officials seemed eager to calm the waters. The French economy minister, Emmanuel Macron, on Sunday called on Greece’s creditors to resume political discussions with Athens immediately following the referendum, no matter what the outcome, and warned against punishing Greece in the event of a no vote.

“Even if the no vote prevails, it’s our responsibility not to re-enact a Treaty of Versailles in the eurozone,” he said at an economics conference in Aix-en-Provence, France, referring to the peace treaty at the end of World War I that pushed harsh reparation terms on Germany.

He called on the Greek people to take responsibility and realize that “this is not just a vote about Greece, but about the whole eurozone. We need to maintain solidarity.”

At a polling station in a middle-class Athens neighborhood, Baizar Tazerian, 76, said she was angered by what she believed had been European interference in the ballot and had just voted to reject the deal in the referendum.