In the fall of 2013, one of Mexico's top housing officials posted an item on Twitter about an advertising campaign promoting mortgages for low-income Mexicans. The campaign's message was simple: “The most important thing in life is in your house.”

It carried the tag line, “Homes with value.”

The official, Alejandro Murat Hinojosa, knows something about homes with value, especially across the border.

Over the years, he and members of his immediate family — starting with his father, José Murat Casab, a former governor of Oaxaca — have bought at least six properties in the United States, including two condominiums near a ski resort in Utah, another at the beach in south Texas and at least one in Manhattan, according to records and interviews. In New York, José Murat's children have also lived for periods of time in one of the more modest condos at the luxurious Time Warner Center overlooking Central Park.

Ownership of the homes was often obscured through variations on family names listed on deeds or through shell companies, according to records examined by The New York Times. In fact, on the day the younger Murat tweeted about the housing program, public filings in Florida recorded the transfer of a $750,000 Boca Raton condo that had been purchased in his wife's name to an entity called IMRO 2013 Trust.

The Murats' real estate holdings stand in contrast to the Everyman image that José Murat, renowned for his political might and booming personality, worked to project as governor.

“I arrived to the state government with my wife, Lupita, and my four children,” he said a year before his term ended in 2004. “And I'm leaving as I arrived, with the same trousers, with the same shoes, with the same shirts and the same car.”

The Murat properties, which emerged during a Times investigation into the people behind shell companies that own condominiums at the Time Warner Center, have not been the subject of any official inquiry and there is no evidence of any wrongdoing behind the purchases. But the private assets of Mexico's public officials have come under intense focus recently with a fresh round of revelations and protests centered on the country's endemic corruption.

Last fall, a scandal erupted over reports that a government contractor had built a multimillion-dollar home for the wife of Mexico's president, Enrique Peña Nieto. While Peña Nieto's wife, Angélica Rivera, said she was paying for it with money she earned as a soap opera star, she also revealed she owned a condo in Florida. Around the same time, Peña Nieto disclosed his own $3.3 million in real estate, jewelry, art and other investments. Last week, he said a new federal comptroller would examine purchases by him and his wife of homes in Mexico.

And in December, an official at Infonavit, the housing agency run by Alejandro Murat, resigned after a photo of his son with a Porsche was posted on social media, setting off a furor and prompting federal inquiries. The official said the posting was a joke and the car did not belong to his family.

These revelations added to the already widespread anger over accusations that corrupt police officers were involved in the abduction and presumed murder last year of 43 college students by a drug cartel. As demonstrations spread, Peña Nieto was reeling. His Institutional Revolutionary Party, the PRI, had ruled the country for seven decades until 2000, and he had pledged to erase its legacy of corruption when he took office more than two years ago.

José Murat, the former Oaxaca governor, has long been a PRI insider. His rise from a childhood in one of Mexico's poorest states to a position as a power broker who has the president's ear is the stuff of lore. There was a failed, and to some skeptics faked, attempt on his life; a long campaign to block a federal audit of state spending; and a record of hardball political tactics. Murat, who has also served as a federal legislator, recently raised his profile again by leading an effort by the Peña Nieto administration to build a cross-party legislative agenda.

Murat's 39-year-old son, Alejandro, by contrast understated and polished, worked for Peña Nieto in state government before being appointed to the federal housing post. In some ways, the father and son represent the new and the old of the PRI, said Edward L. Gibson, a Northwestern University professor who studied Oaxaca for a book on authoritarian governments.

“Peña Nieto may be the new face of the PRI,” Gibson said, “but the dinosaurs are still part of the coalition.”

José and Alejandro Murat denied ownership of several residences around the country that The Times traced to them.

José Murat said the Time Warner condo was owned by a relative. Alejandro Murat said the Florida condo was owned by his mother-in-law. Another Manhattan condo, which records show was originally purchased in the name of Alejandro's wife, belongs to an uncle, he said.

In an email, José Murat said the only U.S. properties owned by his immediate family were the two condos in Park City, Utah. They were purchased in 2004 — one by his two sons and the other by his two daughters — for a total of $690,000. At least one of the Murat children was a teenager at the time. But Murat said: “I do not personally own any real estate directly or indirectly in the United States.”

The Murat properties show how the legal mechanisms available in the United States to hold property without disclosing the actual owner's name can make tracing money difficult. This can be a particular problem for Mexico, which, like many developing nations, has long experienced the flight of both legitimate and illicit capital.

Wealthy Mexicans are buying property in the United States at a brisk pace with few questions asked, The Times found, even as border security is tightened against poor immigrants trying to cross into the country.

“You have all these governors coming and going here, and they have investment properties in the United States with money made in Mexico,” said Juan Ruiz-Healy, a Mexican journalist who anchored the country's “60 Minutes” program and has written about José Murat over the years. “The U.S. will never say to them, `Where did the money come from?”'