“Xscape,” the new album credited to Michael Jackson, revolves around the familiar voice of a ghost mourned worldwide. That voice is airborne and supple, tenderly concerned, playful and percussive; then it grows increasingly tense, distraught, desolate, embittered. Jackson’s voice is a precious digital keepsake; it’s also, on many of the tracks, the only part of his latest songs that Jackson ever heard.

“Xscape” (Epic) represents the bionic Michael Jackson: an identifiable remnant of the man encased in gleaming contemporary technology. The voice, the words and the melodies on “Xscape” are Jackson; nearly all of the rest was built around them. Something of the flesh-and-blood original persists, but it’s now inseparable from the new machinery.

No one is claiming that “Xscape” is the album Jackson would have made had he survived to finish rehearsing and performing his 50 scheduled 2009 comeback shows in London. “Michael Jackson’s official canon — the albums, performances and short films he oversaw and realized during his lifetime — is complete,” the liner notes to “Xscape” say. He died on June 25, 2009, during a final stretch of rehearsals, from an overdose of Propofol, the anesthetic he had been using as a sleep aid.

Unlike “Michael,” the posthumous collection released in 2010 that included relatively recent outtakes, “Xscape” offers no glimpse of anything Jackson wrote after his last finished studio album, “Invincible” in 2001. The Michael Jackson estate has been digging deeper into the archives, finding every scrap it can salvage. The eight songs on “Xscape” date initially from 1983 to 1999, although Mr. Jackson worked on some of them again in the 2000s.

The job that “Xscape” sets itself, in an ungainly term from the liner notes, is to “contemporize” the songs — that is, to update them for the pop market and the radio environment of 2014. To do so, the album’s productions have extracted Jackson’s vocals — he was known to record dozens of takes at a time, giving producers plenty of options — and surrounded them with new backup arrangements, treating his songs like the kind of a cappella tracks that hip-hop and dance music producers regularly build remixes around. A major investment is at stake: “Xscape” is the latest product of a reported seven-year, $250 million dollar deal between the Jackson estate and Sony Music.

By design or not, the songs on “Xscape” trace a poignant narrative arc: from blissful romance to thoughts of exploitation and betrayal to a final, desperate longing for escape. At the beginning, a euphoric Mr. Jackson croons “Love Never Felt So Good” over rolling, gospelly piano chords played by the song’s co-writer, Paul Anka; warm and tuneful, it’s the album’s introductory single in John McClain’s string-laden version and a lighter, disco-revival production by Timbaland that wedges in an appearance by Justin Timberlake, poaching a verse. “Slave to the Rhythm” (not the Grace Jones song) and “Do You Know Where Your Children Are” worry about the exploitation of women and girls. By the time “Xscape” ends the album, Jackson has moved into his bleak, scratchy, heavy-breathing staccato mode, as he sings about being pressured by relationships, the media and “the system.”

The deluxe version of the album includes the same songs in demos that Jackson himself worked on; it becomes a fascinating before-and-after comparison. Some demos were clearly just starters; “Love Never Felt So Good” has only piano, voice and finger snaps. Others were apparently close to completion. (Since Jackson repeatedly revised unfinished recordings, it’s hard to know what state of each song these demos represent.) The selections for “Xscape” were winnowed from two dozen unreleased songs that had full-length vocal takes, a sign that Jackson thought the material was worthwhile. But Jackson’s original intentions died with him; what remains are waveforms.

If that sounds like “Xscape” is some corruption of Jackson’s artistic legacy — well, it’s not that clear cut. By all accounts, Jackson himself would have wanted to keep making hits, and he would have made every effort to keep his music current, including rerecording backup tracks. (As a performer who strove to keep his every public utterance perfect, he might even have been more upset by the revelation of unfinished demo recordings than by slick updates.) And Jackson was by no means the only songwriter to unearth old material for a new album.

Current R&B is open to both the reprogrammed retro sounds of producers like Pharrell and to the brittle artificiality of all-electronic R&B, and Jackson could have pushed his vault recordings in either direction, or another one entirely. In the digital realm, nothing is final until it’s released — and then it can still be remixed.

The executive producer of “Xscape,” and the hands-on producer for most of the songs, is Timbaland, a worthy choice; one song each was also assigned to Mr. McClain, a manager of the estate; Stargate; and Rodney Jerkins, who radically improved “Xscape,” a song he started with Jackson in 1999. For the new version, he removed a corny jailbreak intro and put considerably more heft and crunch in the beat, and he brought in strings and horns. He also illuminated, far more clearly than the demo, a mood shift in the bridge, where Jackson eerily sings, “When I go, this world won’t bother me no more.” In the demo, the bridge continued to ride the groove; in the new version, it’s a churchy, paradisiacal chorus, a brief refuge in harmony and rich strings.

Timbaland’s transformations are masterly. “Slave to the Rhythm,” about a woman enslaved by marriage and job, trades the demo’s mechanical beat for a jittery double-time barrage that ricochets against the vocal and makes Jackson’s percussive angst even more dramatic. “Chicago,” an odd apology to a cuckolded husband, replaces the demo’s sustained keyboard chords with a counterpoint of tubalike bass and airy high tones. Timbaland discarded the original synthesizer bass line of “Do You Know Where Your Children Are” and came up with an odder, more arresting one that leaps way up and down. But he still couldn’t distance the song far enough from Jackson’s masterpiece “Wanna Be Startin’ Somethin’.”

Stargate, the Norwegian production team, perked up but ill-served “A Place With No Name,” based on “A Horse With No Name” by America. The spartan demo uses America’s guitar chords as Jackson sings about finding a mysterious utopia but regretfully leaving it behind to return to his family. Stargate exchanges guitar for a keyboard riff that’s far too close to “The Way You Make Me Feel,” and their dance beat treats the rising angst of Jackson’s vocal as a distraction.

“Xscape” does polish up these old songs, even if it wipes away some of Jackson’s ideas, like the big-band tango Jackson invoked on the demo of “Blue Gangsta.” And Jackson’s voice — deliberately pushed up front in the mixes — is more vivid, and less processed-sounding, than it was on his later albums, whether he’s exulting or imploring or grunting or whooping.

Yet it’s clear why Jackson shelved the songs on “Xscape.” They’re near misses, either not quite as striking as what he released or lesser examples of ideas he exploited better elsewhere. “Chicago” is overshadowed by Jackson’s other she-done-me-wrong songs like “Billie Jean” and “Dirty Diana”; Even “Xscape” — a tour-de-force production that pulls together the harsh latter-day Jackson and the top-of-the-world exuberance of earlier songs like “Don’t Stop ’Til You Get Enough” — is basically a variant on the distorted bass and deep paranoia of “Scream.”

Jackson’s posthumous handlers are encyclopedic and savvy about what he left behind, but it’s all retrospective. Some Michael Jackson rejects would do other musicians proud. But Jackson was competing with himself, and his estate’s projects so far suggest that his best music was released during his lifetime. Archivists and producers can restyle Jackson’s work and “contemporize” him, up to a point. But with every bionic mechanism at their disposal, they can’t resurrect him.