Having reached the top of a major corporation and amassed a fortune, chief executives often wonder: What’s next?

After Donald Trump, the answer may well be a run for the White House.

Trump had no political or military experience, the traditional routes to high political office. Virtually his only qualification was his business career, and a checkered one at that, considering his own brush with personal bankruptcy.

“There is this sense that if Trump got it, why shouldn’t they?” said David Gergen, co-director of the Center for Public Leadership at Harvard Kennedy School and an adviser to four presidents. “They’ve been more successful, they have more experience, and they’ve run a public company, which is more equivalent to what a president does than a private company” like the Trump Organization.

Stu Loeser, once press secretary for Michael R. Bloomberg, the former New York mayor who considered a presidential run last year, concurred. “If you run a company that has employed tens of thousands of people, and generated lots of profit and been undeniably successful, and you look at a sitting president who, to be honest, a lot of business people don’t have much respect for, you think, why not me?” he said.

Loeser runs his own strategic consulting firm, and told me he has clients who are business executives considering a run for high public office. “I can’t tell you their names, obviously,” he said.

Boldface corporate names widely discussed as contenders for the next Democratic presidential nomination include chief executives like Howard Schultz of Starbucks, Robert A. Iger of Disney and Marc Benioff of Salesforce.com, along with Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook chief operating officer, and Oprah Winfrey, chairwoman and chief executive of Harpo Inc., which owns half of the Oprah Winfrey Network.

All deny they’re running, or even seriously considering it. But everyone demurs so far ahead of the first primaries, as did Hillary Clinton four years ago, and it hasn’t stopped anyone from speculating. That’s especially the case for people who, appalled by the Trump administration, can hardly wait for the next campaign.

“I feel many of these chief executives are responding to a public longing for a strongman, or woman, a strong leader,” Gergen said. “There’s a sense that’s why Trump got elected. You’re seeing the same thing in Europe, in Asia, in a long list of countries. People are dissatisfied with standard politicians. Military types and business people with a strong track record offer an attractive alternative.”

Apart from proven business experience, they have widespread name recognition or identification with major consumer brands. And they have enough money to finance their own campaigns.

I’ve spoken this week to multiple people who have at least discussed the possibility of running for office with Schultz and Iger. (All declined to be named discussing what were private conversations.)

Schultz, 63, with a fortune estimated by Forbes at $3 billion, came close to making a bid last year, but backed out after concluding it would be very difficult to defeat Clinton, who seemed to have the Democratic nomination all but locked up and at the time seemed likely to win the presidency.

Those circumstances have obviously changed drastically. With Trump in office, the next Democratic race appears wide open, and many friends and potential donors are urging Schultz to run.

Schultz seemed to pave the way in December, when he announced he’d step down as Starbucks’ chief executive in April. But he continues to be actively involved in the expansion of the company’s high-end “roasteries” as well as its social-impact initiatives.

“Howard Schultz is definitely being pursued,” Gergen said. “He has a powerful social conscience. He comes from a very different place than the kind of chief executive with a big ego who wants the trappings of presidential power.”

Schultz declined to comment.

Last year Iger, 66, told The Hollywood Reporter that “a lot of people — a lot — have urged me to seek political office,” and last week the entertainment publication fueled renewed speculation when it reported that Iger had discussed the possibility with Bloomberg.

People who have discussed a possible presidential run with Iger told me that his discussion with Bloomberg, some years ago, focused more on a possible run for mayor of New York City, where Iger has an apartment. New York has long welcomed nonresident candidates like Clinton, so Iger’s California residency isn’t seen as an obstacle.

Both Iger and Bloomberg declined to comment.

Whether any of those jobs, including the presidency, would actually be better than being chief executive of Disney remains an open question. After earlier announcing his retirement, Iger recently said he was willing to extend his contract, which would eliminate the need for any high-profile exit strategy, at least for the next few years.

Campaign buttons emblazoned with “Vote for Benioff” and “Marc Benioff for President” circulated two years ago at Salesforce’s annual Dreamforce conference in San Francisco, which draws hundreds of thousands of participants and has been viewed by some as a likely launching pad for any Benioff campaign.

Sandberg’s coming nationwide tour to promote the new book she co-authored, “Option B,” which describes coming to terms with her husband’s sudden death in 2015 and other stories of coping with adversity, has fueled speculation (and possible wishful thinking) that the book could be a springboard for a presidential campaign.

As a billionaire ($1.47 billion, Forbes estimates) and a key executive of the hugely successful Facebook, Sandberg has enormous name recognition. Her previous book, “Lean In,” was a best-seller and inspired a rallying cry for women. She has worked in politics before, as an assistant to former Treasury secretary Lawrence H. Summers, and was a donor to Clinton’s campaign. She was considered a candidate for a top post in any Clinton administration.

Sandberg has denied any immediate presidential ambitions, insisting that she loves her job at Facebook. At 47, she’s under no pressure to run this election cycle.

(Widespread reports that Facebook founder and chief executive Mark Zuckerberg would run for president seem even more far-fetched. The speculation appears to have been set off by a Bloomberg News report that Zuckerberg would retain voting control of Facebook even if he sold his shares and served in a government position for up to two years. Zuckerberg has denied any interest in running.)

Then there’s Winfrey, 63, who for many Democrats might amount to the dream candidate: She has unrivaled star power, is an African-American woman, has run a successful business, and has a fortune estimated by Forbes at $3 billion.

In an interview broadcast last week on Bloomberg Television but taped in December, the host, David Rubenstein, brought up the idea: “It’s clear that you don’t need government experience to be elected president of the United States, right?”

“That’s what I thought,” Winfrey replied. “I thought, ‘Oh gee, I don’t have the experience, I don’t know enough.’ And now I’m thinking, ‘Oh! Oh.'”

But when Rubenstein began to ask, “As you consider whether you are going to run for president of the United States or not ...,” she interjected, “No, that won’t be happening.”