GELUGOR, Malaysia — Carrying one child in her arm, a second on her back and holding the hand of a third, Hasinah Izhar waded waist-deep through a mangrove swamp into the Bay of Bengal, toward a fishing boat bobbing in the dusk.

“Troops are coming, troops are coming,” the smuggler said. “Get on the boat quickly.”

If she was going to change her mind, she would have to do it now.

Izhar, 33, had reached the muddy shore after sneaking down the dirt paths and around the fish ponds of western Myanmar, where she and about 1 million other members of the Rohingya minority are stateless, shunned and persecuted for their Muslim faith.

She had signed up for passage to Malaysia, but knew that the voyage would be treacherous, that even if she survived, the smugglers would demand ransom before letting her and her children go, and that they sometimes beat, tortured or sold into slavery those who could not pay.

Her husband had been among tens of thousands who made the journey two years earlier, after Buddhist mobs rampaged through villages like their own, burning houses and killing at least 200 people. He had warned her not to follow, telling her the trip was too dangerous and too expensive.

But as she reached the wooden skiff that would take them on the first leg of a weekslong journey, one terrible fact weighed heaviest: She had left behind her oldest child, a 13-year-old boy named Jubair.

Since 2012, tens of thousands of Rohingya have fled Myanmar, where they are officially considered intruders. Lost in the diplomatic wrangling over their fate are the anguished choices faced by the families who leave and the harrowing personal consequences they must endure.

Izhar knew it would cost as much as $2,000 just to bring her three youngest children to Malaysia. Taking Jubair could double the smugglers' price, and she had only $500 from selling their house, a bamboo and mud-daub hut in the village of Thayet Oak.

She had spent her entire life in the countryside around the village. She was married there at 18, and lost her first husband to a sudden illness. She relied on help from relatives to support her two gangly boys, Jubair and Junaid. A few years later, she married again and had another boy, Sufaid, and then a girl, Parmin.

It was while she was pregnant with Parmin that her husband fled to Malaysia.

Buddhist militants had attacked villages like Thayet Oak across Rakhine state. Worried that he would be arrested and beaten like some of his friends, Ms. Izhar’s husband went into hiding. Then in late 2012, he disappeared entirely, not calling to tell her that he had gone to Malaysia until three months after he arrived.

Violence against the Rohingya flared again last year. Izhar heard rumors of children being shot. She saw police officers break a man’s hand and strike another in the head with clubs, leaving him bleeding and unconscious.

Women living alone were especially vulnerable, and when night fell, she kept the house dark and hushed her children. By December, when word of ships waiting in the Bay of Bengal spread through the villages, she could not wait any longer.

"How can I stay here?" she asked. "The old, the young, everyone has to keep watch on the village every night to protect the women. All the women are going to Malaysia, so I will go to Malaysia, too."

But she was tormented by the thought of Jubair.  What would become of him, alone in Thayet Oak, exposed to the very dangers she was running from? What would have become of her other children if they stayed?

When it was time to leave, Jubair was off with friends in another village, and there was no time to think. She gathered up the other children, packed a bundle and fled.

Now, as the shoreline receded in the distance, she wished she had had a chance to explain her decision to Jubair, and to hug him goodbye.

"Some words came to my mind," she recalled later. "If I can stay alive, I will bring him to Malaysia. I felt very sad to leave my boy behind, but it would be better for the family if we left to live or die somewhere else. We couldn't stay."

The Transaction

After about a week at sea, Izhar's family reached a much larger ship, where they joined hundreds of other migrants. Soon after the passengers boarded, the smugglers demanded that they hand over the phone numbers of relatives who were expected to pay for the journey.

The next morning, crew members had her call her husband, Dil Muhammad Rahman. That was the first he knew that she had left Myanmar. She told him the smugglers were demanding about $2,100 in return for releasing her and the three children.

"I don't have the money to pay for you!" he shouted, and demanded to know why she had left Jubair behind.

Izhar and her children stayed in the hold for weeks while their fate was negotiated. Twice a day, they received water and food: usually a scoop of rice with lentils or dried fish so putrid that she could barely swallow it, although the famished children wolfed down their servings.

The smugglers kept up the pressure. One whipped Ms. Izhar several times on the back and waist with a piece of heavy plastic tubing, and they called her husband repeatedly.

“Don’t you want your family released?” one asked him. “If you don’t they will be thrown into the water.”

Haggling ensued. The smugglers' price dropped to $1,700.

Rahman begged everyone he knew for help: relatives, friends, friends of friends. "I started weeping; I would crouch at their feet," he said. He told them: "For the sake of my children, I will pay you back. If I cannot, I will be a slave for you."

The Boy Left Behind

From the nearest city, Sittwe, the capital of Rakhine state, the village of Thayet Oak is a 45-minute ferry ride, then a four-hour drive along rutted dirt roads.

The first villager who appeared there was asked if he knew a 13-year-old boy named Jubair. "Yes," he said, and pointed down a dusty dirt road. At the end of the road, a boy was carrying two aluminum water jugs on the ends of a bamboo pole. "That's him."

Everyone in Thayet Oak seems to know Jubair, the boy who was left behind.

In a dark room of his cousin's bamboo house, where he sometimes sleeps, he sat on the dirt floor and patiently answered questions.

Where is your home?

“My mother sold the house to pay for the boat fees.”

Why did your mother leave without you?

"I didn't know about it. She could not find me. She could not tell me. I was in another person's house. I was lost."

Are you going to school?

“I have not been enrolled this year.”

What do you do?

“I work at a person’s house. I fetch water for him.”

Are you happy doing this work?

“No.”

Do you want to go to school?

“Yes.”

School is unlikely. Rohingya are denied citizenship by the Myanmar government, and the residents of Thayet Oak must seek permission before leaving the village, even to collect firewood in the nearby jungle. At a guard post outside the village, police officers watch everyone who comes in and out.

In early May, a shrimp farmer, Salim Ullah, noticed Jubair sitting in a bamboo shack that serves as the local grocery store.

"When I asked people, they said he has no father. His mother left already," Ullah said. "I asked where does he stay? They said he just stays on the street."

Ullah said he had took Jubair into his home as a servant, giving him work fetching water for the equivalent of $9 a month.

Jubair has spoken to his mother six or seven times since her departure. She calls a neighbor's phone, and the neighbors summon him.

What did your mother say to you the last time you spoke?

"She said, 'Son, don't cry, don't be sad, stay well.'"

Do you miss your mother?

He could not speak, and started to cry.

Hardships in Malaysia

Two days after she landed in Malaysia, more than a month after her journey began, Izhar was driven to Penang Island. Rahman beamed as he held Parmin for the first time.

But there were also pained questions as he looked at his emaciated family.

"How could you come to Malaysia with such small children?" he said. "Why did you leave Jubair behind?"

Nearly six months after her voyage, Izhar and her family share a small, two-story house with 13 other people.

She rises at 6:30 to pray; cook breakfast for her family; prepare her son Junaid for a school for refugees; and tidy the cramped bedroom where the couple and three children sleep on a tattered, full-size mattress.

Rahman walks to a spot beside an expressway where he waits for building and maintenance contractors looking for workers. If he is lucky, he can earn $8 to $16 for a day's work.

But most days he comes home empty-handed. There is pressure to repay the money he borrowed to pay the smugglers.

"As a mother, living without my eldest son is emotional torment for me," Izhar said. "I wouldn't dare bring my son over on the same hard journey I took. But as a mother, I feel like bringing my son back to me."