WHEN they don’t involve sailors kissing nurses, the symbolic photographs of New York City usually involve skyscrapers: Alfred Stieglitz’s snowy shot of the Flatiron Building; Berenice Abbott’s electric “Night View”; Margaret Bourke-White perched atop an art-deco eagle of the Chrysler Building. And Lewis Hine’s celebrated portrait of 11 Depression-era ironworkers, lunching along an I-beam on the unfinished Empire State Building.

No?

No, on several counts.

The shot isn’t by Hine. And it’s not atop the Empire State Building — despite common misperceptions, misrepresentations and an Internet that insists otherwise. Taken Sept. 20, 1932, during the construction of Rockefeller Center, the well-known portrait of 11 immigrant laborers, legs dangling 850 feet above Midtown, ran in the Oct. 2 Sunday supplement of The New York Herald-Tribune, with the caption “Lunch Atop a Skyscraper.” Everybody knows the picture. Nobody knows who took it. And for most of its 80 years no one has known who’s in it.

A bit of the mystery is resolved in “Men at Lunch,” a documentary about the photo that’s featured in the current DOC NYC series at the IFC Center in Greenwich Village. Its director isn’t making any exorbitant claims. “We just muddied the waters a bit,” Sean O Cualain said with a smile during a recent interview in New York. “It was already a complex story full of unknowns. And we added a few more unknowns.”

But “Men at Lunch” does solve some of the puzzle created during a New York autumn when Babe Ruth’s Yankees were winning the World Series and Franklin Delano Roosevelt was winning the presidency. Produced by Mr. O Cualain’s brother, Eamonn, and made on a virtual shoestring, the film establishes the identity of at least two of the long-anonymous workers. Joseph Eckner, third from left, and Joe Curtis, third from right, were cross-referenced with other photos that the O Cualains were shown at Rockefeller Center. While the “Lunch” print itself bears no identifications, Eckner and Curtis were certainly the same men named on other photos taken that day.

Two others — at each end of the row, one lighting a cigarette, the other holding a bottle and glaring at the camera — were traced to Ireland, which is where the O Cualain brothers, natives of Galway, entered the story.

“We were in doing another documentary and were having lunch in Whelan’s Pub, in Shanaglish,” Sean O Cualain said, referring to a small village in County Galway. “We saw the picture on the wall, and Mikey Whelan told us the story.” As Mr. Whelan, the publican, explained it, the framed copy had come from a Boston-area man named Pat Glynn, who was convinced that his father, Sonny Glynn, was the man with the bottle at the far right, and that his uncle, Matty O’Shaughnessy, was at the far left with a cigarette.

Comparisons with family photos seem to back him up. What Mr. Glynn knew for sure is that the men had emigrated in the ’20s from Shanaglish, hence the prominent display of the photo in a pub there.

“With all the evidence they’ve given us and based on their own belief,” Eamonn O Cualain said, “we believe them.”

By the end of the film, his brother added, “you want to believe them too.”

The popularity of the picture, which has been colorized, satirized, burlesqued with the Muppets and turned into a life-size sculpture by Sergio Furnari, is partly about the casual recklessness of its subjects: The beam on which they sit seems suspended over an urban abyss, with the vastness of Central Park spread out behind them and nothing, seemingly below. But in fact a finished floor of 30 Rockefeller Plaza was probably just a few feet away. And it was certainly not casual. As the Rockefeller collection shows, it was among many such posed photos taken and distributed to the news media with the intention of promoting Depression-era real estate (albeit by photographers who were “absolutely mad,” said the archivist, Christine Roussel).

The confusion over Hine’s involvement stems from the wrong assumption that the skyscraper was the Empire State Building, which Hine did photograph. The Rockefeller archive attributes the photo to “unknown” because no one was credited, though photos exist of other photographers who were taking pictures that day. The suspects include Charles Ebbets, William Leftwich and Thomas Kelley.

The O Cualains have a copy of a second shot, evidently taken just seconds after the famous original, the cracked glass negative of which is owned by the Corbis collection and kept in the Iron Mountain storage facility, 220 feet beneath the surface of western Pennsylvania.

“We found it on a poster site on the Internet, but pretty quickly after we started asking questions the phone started going dead,” Sean O Cualain said, regarding the site. “They didn’t know who owned the copyright, you know what I mean? So we couldn’t use it in the film, but we have it on our office wall, and it’s taken three or four seconds after the original snap.”

The cigarette has just been lighted, his brother said. “And the guy on the far side has a funny look on his face, as if the photographer said, ‘Don’t look at the bloody camera!’ ”

The presence in the picture of Sonny Glynn and Matty O’Shaughnessy are another reason “Lunch Atop a Skyscraper” long ago became a classic: The synthesis of immigration, aspiration and determination, the vertical grasp of Manhattan at a time when jobs were scarce and men were desperate. As John Rasenberger, the author of “High Steel: The Daring Men Who Built the World’s Greatest Skyline,” says in the documentary: “The pay was good. The thing was, you had to be willing to die.”

All of which have obscured the merits of “Lunch Atop a Skyscraper” as a work of art.

“Lewis Hine was hired to document the Empire State Building, and as a body of work that to me represents a greater artistic achievement, at least across the series,” said Sarah Meister, a curator of photography at the Museum of Modern Art, who put together the exhibition “Picturing New York” of 2009. “But there’s a difference between a picture that transcends its function for its own intrinsic merits and one that has transcended it for other cultural reasons.” She would, she said, be delighted if someone wanted to donate a good print of “Lunch Atop a Skyscraper” to MoMA. “We don’t have one.”

Whether its subject is a masterpiece or a novelty, “Men at Lunch” was a natural for DOC NYC, now in its third year. “Needless to say, I am a fan,” said the senior programmer Mystelle Brabbee, who called the film a “love letter,” albeit one that takes a different tack from other films about architecture.

“We mostly hear about the famous architects and financiers, but this one iconic photograph shows the spirit of how Rockefeller Center was built — the fulfillment of the promise of Manhattan,” she said. “Beauty, service, dignity and humor dangling 56 stories above the midstream rush of the metropolis, all summarized in this moment.”

The documentary invites the viewer to meditate on that moment, she added, “without trying to reveal all the answers surrounding it.”