WITH summer just around the bend, many families are planning getaways. But figuring out all the details — from which hotels are child-friendly to how many diapers to pack for that five-hour flight (more is better) — can be critical for a smooth trip. Here are some lessons I have learned over the years, both from other travelers and through my own experience.

DON’T PACK WHAT YOU CAN GET THERE. Leave the extra formula, suntan lotion and Cheerios at home. Any extra cash you may spend will be offset by what you save in checked bag fees and overall inconvenience. Besides, you are inevitably going to forget something and have to make a run to the local grocery or convenience store anyway. If you’re willing to spend some money, you can give a list to the hotel concierge and ask him or her to buy your supplies in advance for a fee or a generous tip.

THINK COMPACT. The more you can leave behind the better, but there are times when taking along a travel bed or a foldable highchair is worth it. For example, when renting a house with friends last spring, my husband and I packed a borrowed BabyBjörn Travel Crib for our daughter, then a year old. Listed at about $220 in a recent Amazon.com search, the bed (which collapses into a compact carry-on that weighs just 11 pounds) isn’t cheap, but it is convenient.

Our friends, who have a 3-year-old, packed the KidCo PeaPod Plus travel bed — a pop-up tent with a blow-up mattress that weighs 6.9 pounds and folds into a convenient carry-on case. We also took our daughter’s Phil & Ted’s Lobster highchair (about $70), which clamps onto most tables and folds flat for easy packing. Sure, we could have managed without it, but it worked perfectly at the breakfast bar and made mealtimes more enjoyable for everyone involved. (Keep in mind that most major hotels will provide a crib. Some, including the Soho and Tribeca Grand hotels in New York, even keep a few strollers on hand to lend to guests.)

TRAVELING BY PLANE? DON’T STUFF EVERYTHING INTO ONE CHECKED BAG. Airlines are generally losing fewer checked bags these days. But that’s little consolation if you’re one of the unlucky ones whose bag goes missing, especially if all the children’s clothes, gear and toys are in it. As a precaution, pack half of those items in one checked bag and half in another or in your carry-on. At a minimum, especially if you’re traveling with small children, take a change of clothes onboard for the child and yourself. That way, when she spills cranberry juice all over you, or her diaper leaks, you have options.

DON’T SCRIMP ON AIRLINE TICKETS. When you are trying to stick to a budget it’s tempting to book the cheaper connecting flight or convince yourself that you don’t need to spend $25 extra each way to check that portable travel bed. The nonstop flight and checked bag fees will add to your expenses, but it’s often not worth the risk of missing a connection or the effort involved in schlepping all those carry-on bags. At least one airline, Frontier, rewards passengers with no carry-on luggage or bags that fit under the seat by boarding them early. For more tips on navigating the major sticking points of flying with children, including the challenge of sitting together, see my Nov. 4 article, “Are We There Yet? When Families Fly.”

GET CREATIVE WITH ENTERTAINMENT. You can quickly turn a luggage rack into an activity gym for an infant by hooking some dangling toys on it. Play-Doh is a godsend when traveling with toddlers who are too young to sit through an in-flight movie and too old to nap in your lap. When interest in that runs out, order ice and extra stirring straws. That kept our daughter entertained for hours after she quickly tired of all the books, stickers and other games we had packed for a two-flight trip to Ecuador when she was about a year old.

And there are plenty of apps that can help keep older children entertained on long flights and road trips. For app options organized by age, see the Dec. 21 Practical Traveler column, “Apps to Keep Children Happy.”

HIPSTER HOTELS ARE GREAT FOR KIDS. Though boutique hotels generally lack child-friendly amenities like children’s clubs or waterslides, parents with older children have told me that such hotels often have other attractions. Many teenagers and tweens love the trendy furniture and amenities like the oversize chess set by the Delano hotel’s pool in Miami or the pet goldfish offered upon check-in at the Soho Grand in New York. And families with young children who wake at the break of dawn often have the pool to themselves while other guests are sleeping off hangovers, as my husband and I discovered a few years ago when we stayed at the Donovan House in Washington, with our daughter, then 3 months old.

One caveat: Like many boutique hotels our room had a sexy shower but lacked a bathtub. (We bathed our daughter in the sink.) But at least we could pretend that we hadn’t completely lost our cool.

MAKE SURE THAT SUITE IS REALLY A SUITE. Many hotels will call a room with anything more than a bed and a desk in it a suite, whether it has a separate living room or not. That is a frustrating misnomer for parents looking to put a door between themselves and their offspring. For example, a “classic suite” at Starwood’s Le Méridien Philadelphia has a partial wall between the bedroom and living area, rather than a full wall and door. There are only three true suites at the hotel, which aren’t sold through the Web site.

Even chains with the word “suites” in their name are not foolproof. Only 10 percent of the rooms at Home2 Suites by Hilton, the chain’s new extended-stay brand, are truly suites with a bedroom and a living area separated by a door. The rest have a curtain that can be drawn halfway across the room to create a separate living area. That’s not to say that these hotels aren’t great for families looking to save money by sharing a room. Home2 Suites offers free continental breakfast and in-room kitchens with full-size refrigerators and dishwashers. But the only way to find out if that room is really a suite is to call the hotel and ask.