Traveling with children seems to operate on a continuum that begins with plane discomfort for the gravely pregnant and ends with teenagers taking ski trips without you. It’s the various in-between stages that currently occupy me: the necessary Children-as-Extra-Luggage travel, as I once did on a book tour with a 5-month-old, coordinating feeds between readings; followed by attempts at Traveling Despite the Child, which my husband and I once did in Japan, hoisting our 10-month-old in a backpack and dining in our hotel bathroom while she slept. And then there is the interminable Where Else Could We Possibly Go? stage, a yearslong stretch of visits to the in-laws, house rentals in places where you won’t bother other people, forays into Disneyland. Into this category fall the whiling away of two-week breaks, babysitter vacations and four-day weekends that constitute the academic calendar.

All of these middle phases involve compromises. The hope is that despite them, participants young and old manage to eke out some modicum of enjoyment, drawn into one another’s world by the sheer force of parental or filial appetite, tolerating or tantruming through the rest.

But when, I wondered, would my children want to do more of what I want to do, or vice versa, and when might those tendencies magically converge? At what age can a child truly appreciate the cultural value of an international journey, on mutually agreeable terms?

As spring break approached this year, I thought I might have finally hit that moment with my nearly 9-year-old daughter — especially if I left my two smaller children, boys whose predilections would confine us largely to playgrounds and ice cream parlors, behind. Perhaps I could take Beatrice to London, a city I lived in 15 years ago and have traveled to frequently since, as a test case: Would she be old enough to appreciate my London — a city of quirky bookshops, World War history and street scenery straight out of “Bleak House” — and also make it her own? By pursuing our shared passions for books and theater in a city that specializes in both, might we achieve that elusive family-travel synchronicity?

As I was contemplating all this, Beatrice happened to be fresh off two viewings of the very English musical “Matilda” and knee-deep in the adventure tales of Enid Blyton, the late children’s book author who remains marginal on these shores but is still revered in Britain. She had read all of Blyton’s books currently available in the States but was far from sated. Amazingly and reassuringly, even in our globalized, technophilic world, finding the requisite book-related experience can still require a voyage.

This upgraded our trip into a kind of literary quest. We would set off in search of British editions, Roald Dahl-based theater, Harry Potter adventure and Rick Riordan-inspired mythology. For my part, having recently read Kate Atkinson’s Blitz-era novel, “Life After Life,” I was eager to revisit the Churchill War Rooms, and to stock up on British editions of Edward St. Aubyn’s Patrick Melrose series. If traveling across the ocean in search of literary pleasure seems an anachronism in our e-reading, Amazon-altered world, I’ve got no problem with that. I bought tickets before I could reconsider.

We started off with a slog. Jet lag is bad enough solo, but with a child who’s slept two hours en route and double the suitcases, taking the stingy Heathrow Express route from the airport to South Kensington instead of a taxi was almost certainly unwise. Once the train deposited us at Paddington Station, we had to navigate the Tube’s interminable damned-be-the-disabled staircases, before briefly settling into our charming house rental, a two-story mews off the Old Brompton Road. Resisting the lure of the sofa, we formally began our trip on common ground: a bookstore.

Hatchards, founded in 1797, is the oldest bookshop in London, a short stroll off Piccadilly Circus, and conveniently close to Fortnum & Mason, one of the best venues for extortionate, fancifully packaged treats. Though no longer the independent bookseller it was during my London days (since acquired by the mega-chain Waterstones) Hatchards retains the stubborn texture of an independent. A wooden staircase, buffed by the ages, winds up multiple floors, past displays featuring an idiosyncratic selection of literary fiction and fustily British subjects. There is no cafe.

The children’s section on the third floor may be smaller than that of the average Barnes & Noble, but its shelves are meatier. British bookstores tend to stock a richer inventory of history books, rather than the watered-down social studies and photographic collage that often passes for nonfiction here. They’re also particularly strong on fairy tales, geography, folklore and mythology — much of it highly appealing to my third-grade Percy Jackson fan.

But it was the “Enid Blyton section” that truly distinguished the British bookstore from the American. Blyton, who died in 1968, was wildly popular in Britain and throughout the Commonwealth for much of the 20th century, and despite having taken a battering in later enlightened years on charges of sexism, racism, elitism and a lack of imagination, her popularity endures. Some of the most egregious material has been sloughed off recent editions, which also bear remarketed illustrations even as the content — boarding school shenanigans, old-fashioned capers and fantasies — remains largely the same.

Hatchards carried four shelves full of Blyton’s tireless series, and was the first of three bookstores we spent serious time in over the course of our nine-day vacation. A close second was a store new to me, but recommended by friends with children who’ve spent time in London. Daunt Books in Marylebone is not only an excellent general bookshop, but also one of the finest travel and world literature bookstores I’ve ever been to, with shelves organized by country. I could have spent the day.

But in two days’ time, we’d be heading to the Warner Brothers studio where the Harry Potter films were shot, just outside London, and I wanted to explore city-side Potter first. Our Harry Potter walking tour was conducted by London Walks, the same tour company I’d patronized when I’d lived there in the ’90s, though my walks were centered on slightly more mature subjects like Churchill’s London and the Inns of Court. We began in the old City of London at a busy intersection near the Bank Tube stop, site of a deleted Knight Bus scene from “Harry Potter and the Prisoner of Azkaban.” Our tour guide, the Dickensian-named Richard Walker, held Beatrice at rapt attention when he stuck to the subject at hand. (Digressions into Bridget Jones territory left her cold.) By the time we had traipsed over the Millennium Bridge (destroyed by Death Eaters!) to the second of two location shots for the Leaky Cauldron (it was moved from Leadenhall Market to Borough Market between the first and third films), I’d promised a repeat movie marathon upon our return.

Determined to avoid the lowest-common-denominator kiddie attractions — no Madame Tussauds or museums dedicated to torture (exception: Tower of London) — I conceded to the London Eye, a mere millennial specter back in 1998. This giant spinning structure doesn’t actually afford much of a view, despite its acrophobic attempts. Yet for children and adults alike, the sheer pomposity of the contraption, an odd marriage of funicular and Ferris wheel, are attraction enough. Through the distorted bubble glass of its walls I spied an enticing climbing playground on the South Bank, a few minutes’ walk away, and bookmarked it for a return trip.

Also on our list of unabashedly family-friendly activities: a double-decker bus tour, run by one of several seemingly interchangeable operators. For a child, the rooftop view offered tangible evidence of just how different big cities still look, despite the cross-Atlantic proliferation of Whole Foods and Starbucks. Yet a similar, Knight Bus-like experience could be found on standard city transport, provided you capture front row seats on top.

It’s hard to disappoint Beatrice and me when it comes to sweet foods, but high tea presented the soggiest deflation of high hopes. Despite not particularly liking cucumber sandwiches, I was looking forward to what I conceived as the ultimate Fancy Nancy experience, even for a girl well past her princess phase. I booked a reservation at the Orangery — “the only royal palace in London where you can enjoy a traditional afternoon tea,” with a spectacle of jam coloring my imagination. Instead, we were handed an apathetic platter with three small sandwiches and pastries per person. (Warning to those bringing multiple children: Pastry distribution is not equitable; there will be fights.) A request for seconds was grimly rebuffed, and we were charged £24 each (about $39) for the privilege.

More economical gratification was easily found. Among the advantages of London’s museums are “family trails” — activity-filled booklets for children 6 to 10, typically free or for a minimal fee. The British Museum offers a guide that follows the history of written communication from ancient Rome to the seventh-century Quran. Another, “Hunting for Dragons,” highlights fantastical creatures from China to Mexico. Any one of them is likely to send Harriet the Spy types tearing through a museum, pencil at the ready.

The best of these, in Beatrice’s view, was “Marvelous Blooms,” a flower-centric guide to the National Gallery’s permanent collection, which had her eagerly scribbling away with colored pencils provided by the museum. Her mother’s attention, however, wandered during these exercises. By the second museum, I realized the solution was to roam the room with an audio guide, swooping in periodically, Montessori-style, lest it start feeling — to me — too much like homework.

Oh, that parental conundrum: when to impose one’s preferences and when to recognize the child’s own? Try too hard to pique a new interest, rather than appeal to an existing one, and you disrupt her enjoyment. There’s often a fine line knowing how much to elevate a child’s understanding of a painting or a monument or a view, rather than just allow her to imbibe culture at her own level. Interrupting her impassioned doodles to point out a work I’d studied in Art History 101 was more often a distraction than an enhancement.

But there was also joy and relief in our moments of two-tiered pleasure, simultaneous yet divergent, and often when least expected. The Churchill War Rooms (called the Cabinet War Rooms until a wing devoted to the former prime minister was added in 2005), the government’s underground bunker and offices during the Blitz, are just around the corner from 10 Downing Street. Its hallways, map rooms and bedroom nooks are so eerily preserved and smartly presented, even people who aren’t Churchill enthusiasts or World War II obsessives will enjoy themselves. Whether it was possible for an 8-year-old child to get it was another question.

“Beatrice, did you know that during World War II, Germany bombed London every night for almost two months straight?” I asked gingerly before our visit, trying not to terrify her. “Children had to be sent to the countryside.”

Blessed be C. S. Lewis: “Isn’t that why the Pevensies went to Digory’s house to begin with?” she said. Not bad, but was it enough?

At Hatchards, I bought her a copy of “Blitz,” part of a British “Dear America”-like series of fictionalized narratives. But I needn’t have worried (nor torn her from Blyton’s “Twins of St. Clare”). The museum provides a separate audio guide tailored to children under 10 — and doesn’t even charge them admission. Beatrice had been loath to listen to the one-size-fits-all audio guide at the British Museum, but she listened straight through the Churchill War Rooms guide, tickled that her version differed from mine.

We also amicably split up at the Globe Theater, where Beatrice reunited with one of her best friends from school, also on vacation. Both theater buffs, the two girls were captivated by the 30-minute tour with its gritty details about inaccessible bathrooms, thatched roofs and rudimentary special effects. They then installed themselves inside a sound booth, rehearsing and recording the balcony scene from “Romeo and Juliet.” Meanwhile, I found a booth where I could listen to “To be or not to be” performed by everyone from John Gielgud to Kenneth Branagh.

There was no splitting up in the West End, however, and despite temptation, I did not drag Beatrice to Richard Eyre’s production of Ibsen’s “Ghosts” at the Almeida, and was grateful not to be forced to miss Hilary Mantel’s “Wolf Hall,” which had yet to open. Instead, we saw three plays based on children’s works of literature: First up was “Emil and the Detectives,” which we saw at the National Theater, just before it closed. Based on a 1929 German children’s book by Erich Kästner, the play offered a moral parable of life in Weimar Germany, with hints of the darkness to come.

Sam Mendes’s musical version of “Charlie and the Chocolate Factory,” which is tentatively slated for Broadway next season, was no “Matilda.” But Beatrice loved it, especially given our own golden-ticket experience. Though we purchased tickets in the nosebleed balcony, we were upgraded to the Royal Box, just beside the stage. No explanation accompanied this beneficence, though the fact that Douglas Hodge, the Tony award-winning actor who portrays Willy Wonka, took his curtain call from within our perch, offered a clue. Who wants to attract the audience’s attention to a half-empty box in prime position?

The final play we saw, “Grimm Tales for Young and Old,” was based on Philip Pullman’s adaptation of the classic stories, which was published as a book for adults in the United States last year. Billing itself “an immersive fairy tale,” the action took place in the basement of the Shoreditch Town Hall, which had been creepily strewed with old dolls, cobwebs, hay, tangled light fixtures and an ineffable cloud of impending doom. The play itself was episodic in nature, following actors from room to room, “Tamara”-style, with short vignettes based on tales both familiar (“Rapunzel,” “Snow White”) and far less so (the rather nasty “Juniper Tree” and a rendition of the eternally puzzling “Hans My Hedgehog”). I opted not to point out the rape metaphors in “Little Red Riding Hood.”

Hands-off parenting moments aside, one of the benefits of the trip was sharing some of my old haunts, several of which centered on the theater district, with my daughter. One favorite, Marchpane, an antiquarian children’s bookseller, is on the ridiculously charming Cecil Court, a pedestrian row of used- and rare-book stores off Charing Cross Road, and a world apart from Leicester Square’s blockbuster shows. Here was my blissfully eternal London, everything exactly as I’d left it, just a few signed Harry Potter volumes added to the mix.

Marchpane opened in 1989 but feels as though it’s been there since the Victorian era. Its owner, Kenneth Fuller, a rare books dealer since 1983, sits at a high desk perched over his wares. The Internet, he said, had proved a disaster for rare books — too many fakes, falsely marketed condition, overall mishandling of precious texts. Intoxicated by the smell of old book glue and the visual splendor of well-maintained first editions, I found it hard to disagree that something got lost when clicked through on a computer. Exploring the shelves, Beatrice spotted an odd little novelization Enid Blyton did of the original Babar picture book by Jean de Brunhoff, which she had to have.

If only the Café in the Crypt at St. Martin in the Fields hadn’t changed! In less glossy times, visitors would sneak into the crypt via a side staircase off Trafalgar Square. Below the church lay a murky cavern, its floors composed of gravestones upon which perched a phalanx of wobbly tables. Snacks were served prison-cafeteria-style; spooning into a custardy pool of pudding felt more than a little bit disgraceful. Not only were you eating on top of the dead — you were also eating nothing good for you.

All that has been spruced up and swept away in the sheen of 2014 investment-town London. Now an enormous spiral staircase and Apple Store-like glass elevator usher visitors into a full-fledged gift shop. The gravestones have been almost entirely replaced with level flooring. There are salads. Passels of Mummies Who Lunch on their extended paid maternity leaves, gurgling babies by their side, line the tables. The only thing that remained the same was the oversize apple crumble, served with a full pitcher of hot vanilla cream — as vulgarly delectable as always. Beatrice wasn’t creeped out in the least.

But Beatrice lay down a line of her own at Warner Brothers’ Studio Tour London. The immense set for all eight Harry Potter films, 20 minutes outside the city, is a must — no, a requirement — for any fan. Here in all its Hogwartian splendor is the Gryffindor common room. The eminently browseable Diagon Alley. Those life-size chess pieces, guardians of the Philosopher’s Stone. I wanted to linger in Ollivander’s, eyeing the wand boxes that had been created for every person, from set design to postproduction, who worked on the films. I longed to goggle for hours at the minutiae in the creature workshop, where goblins’ masks were steps away from the animatronic Monster Book of Monsters. In a complete loss of self-control, I spent hundreds of pounds buying branded clothing, chocolate frogs (yes, they contain Wizard Cards) and a Marauder’s Map. (I later regretted buying so many Bertie Bott’s Every Flavour Beans, which include a most realistic “Vomit” and “Earthworm.”)

After three and a half hours of tracking down the studio’s hidden snitches and slurping its unctuous Butterbeer, Beatrice wanted to get back to London already, and I had to be dragged back to the bus. Thank goodness my older son just finished his first marathon reading of the series. We’re going to have to go back.

Reading List

While not all of these books are expressly about London or even England, each in its own way allows children to read their way into London literary life — the language, the characters, the cuisine, the culture, the chattering classes of the pre-Dickens set.

“Pop-Up London,” by Jennie Maizels. Paper engineering by Richard Ferguson. Candlewick Press.

“London for Children,” North Bank and South Bank volumes, by Matteo Pericoli. Macmillan.

“Usborne Illustrated Stories From Shakespeare.” Adapted by Rosie Dickens. Illustrated by Christa Unzner. Usborne.

“The London Jungle Book,” written and illustrated by Bhajju Shyam. Tara Books.

Secrets at Sea,” by Richard Peck. Illustrated by Kelly Murphy. Dial.

“The Mouse With the Question Mark Tail,” by Richard Peck. Illustrated by Kelly Murphy. Dial.

“How to Catch a Bogle,” by Catherine Jinks. Houghton Mifflin, 2013.

From the “My Story” Scholastic series:

“Blitz: A Wartime Girl’s Diary 1940-41,” by Vince Cross.

“Factory Girl: A Victorian Match Girl London, 1888,” by Pamela Oldfield.

“Lady Jane Grey:The Diary of a Tudor Lady 1547-1554,” by Sue Reid.

“Elizabeth: A Tudor Princess’s Diary 1544” by Kathryn Lasky.

“Titanic: An Edwardian Girl’s Diary 1912,” by Ellen Emerson White.

The Classics:

Harry Potter, by J. K. Rowling, Scholastic.

The St. Clare’s series.

The Famous Five series.

The Adventure series.

The Secret Seven series.

All by Enid Blyton. Hodder in Britain; Pan Macmillan in the United States.

Bookstores

Hatchards, 187 Piccadilly; www.hatchards.co.uk.

Daunt Books, 83 Marylebone High Street, and other locations;dauntbooks.co.uk/shops.asp.

Marchpane, 16 Cecil Court, Charing Cross Road; marchpane.com.