TAIPEI — Tsai Ing-wen was sworn in Friday as the president of Taiwan, becoming the island’s first female leader.

Her early days in office will be closely watched around the region for signs of her approach to relations with China. Taiwan’s powerful neighbor claims it as part of its territory, and has threatened to use force to prevent Taiwan from taking steps toward formal independence.

In the January election, Ms. Tsai easily defeated her closest challenger in a campaign that featured deep concern over the economy. Taiwan has now had three quarters of economic contraction and exports have declined for 15 months in a row.

The exiting president, Ma Ying-jeou, of the Nationalist Party, or Kuomintang, had pushed for closer relations with China during his eight years in office. But voters grew increasingly wary of that approach, and there were large protests in 2014 against a trade pact with China.

Ms. Tsai has said she will maintain the cross-strait status quo, but is expected to be far more reserved than Mr. Ma in pursuing trade and other agreements with China.

Even before she was inaugurated, China showed clear indications of increasing pressure on Ms. Tsai’s incoming government.

“The honeymoon for Tsai Ing-wen is going to be very short, if it’s not already over,” said Jean-Pierre Cabestan, a professor of government and international studies at Hong Kong Baptist University.

Chinese state media outlets have called on her to endorse the “92 Consensus,” under which the Kuomintang and China’s ruling Communist Party both recognize Taiwan and the mainland as part of “one China” but each side has its own understanding of what that means.

“If there is a cross-strait deadlock, or a crisis emerges, the person who changed the current situation should bear responsibility,” Ma Xiaoguang, a spokesman for China’s Taiwan Affairs Office, said at a news conference last week.

Since the election, several Taiwanese citizens have been deported from Kenya and Malaysia to China over allegations of telecommunication fraud, triggering protests from Taiwan’s government. China also resumed diplomatic relations with Gambia, which had previously recognized Taiwan’s government.

Taiwan’s invitation to participate as an observer in the World Health Organization’s annual assembly this year included, for the first time, a mention of “one China.” The new government said it rejected the organization’s interpretation of the terms of its involvement, but would still participate out of concern for public health.

In recent days, China’s military has conducted drills along the Taiwan Strait. While China’s Ministry of National Defense said the exercises were not directed at anyone in particular, many analysts in Taiwan said the timing was connected to Ms. Tsai’s inauguration.