Assailants with rifles, explosives and women’s disguises stunned Iran on Wednesday with audacious attacks on the parliament building and tomb of its revolutionary founder, the worst terrorist strike to hit the Islamic republic in years.

At least 12 people were killed and 42 wounded in the pair of assaults, which lasted for hours and clearly took Iran’s elite security forces by surprise. The six known attackers also were killed, official media said, and five suspects were reported detained.

Iran’s Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps blamed Saudi Arabia and the United States for the assaults even as responsibility for them was asserted by the Islamic State, the Sunni extremist group that has taken credit for a staccato of terrorist attacks around the world in the last few weeks.

If the Islamic State’s claim is true, that would be its first successful attack in Iran, which is predominantly Shiite Muslim and regarded by Sunni militants as a nation of heretics. Iranian-backed forces in Iraq and Syria are helping battle the Islamic State.

Tensions in the Middle East were already high following a visit by President Donald Trump last month to Saudi Arabia, Iran’s rival. Saudi Arabia led a regional effort on Monday to isolate Qatar, which maintains good relations with Iran.

In a statement, the Revolutionary Guards Corps said: “The public opinion of the world, especially Iran, recognizes this terrorist attack — which took place a week after a joint meeting of the U.S. president and the head of one of the region’s backward governments, which constantly supports fundamentalist terrorists — as very significant,” a reference to Saudi Arabia’s ruling monarchy.

Expressions of sympathy from world leaders for the victims poured in after the assaults. But hours elapsed before a condolence statement from the Trump administration, which has called Iran the world’s leading state sponsor of terrorism.

“The United States condemns the terrorist attacks in Tehran today,” the State Department said. “We express our condolences to the victims and their families, and send our thoughts and prayers to the people of Iran. The depravity of terrorism has no place in a peaceful, civilized world.”

Eleven of the victims died at the parliament building, and one at the mausoleum of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, father of the 1979 revolution. Four of the assailants were killed at the parliament, and two at the mausoleum. Five were men, and one mausoleum assailant was a woman.