Luxury travel can be experienced in two ways: by paying top dollar or by paying less. Given the choice, wouldn’t you pick the latter?

Of course, the idea of what luxury travel is can differ depending on the person. For some, it means hotels with butlers and fancy sheets and flying first class; for others, it’s about hitting restaurants with three Michelin stars and hiring the occasional private guide and car with a driver.

Ultimately, it doesn’t matter how you define high-end travel. What matters is that it doesn’t have to be had at a premium price.

Below are destinations where you can save money on an upscale trip without sacrificing a feeling of luxury.

Barcelona

Looking for a luxury vacation to Barcelona without paying top dollar? Done, says Virginia Irurita, the founder of Made for Spain and Portugal, a Madrid-based company that sells upscale trips. “Barcelona has become much more affordable in the last year, and a high-end trip on a limited budget is now attainable,” she said.

Ms. Irurita’s advice:

WHEN TO GO Hotels in Barcelona have the highest prices from April through October. From November through March, rates are at least 25 percent lower. Many five-star hotels also offer attractive packages during this low season.

WHERE TO STAY Accommodations in residential neighborhoods offer better value than ones in touristy areas. Les Tres Torres, for example, has a few locally run, upscale properties, like Primero Primera, on a quiet, tree-lined street.

INDULGE IN LUNCH Locals make lunch their biggest meal of the day, and visitors should too, because they can take advantage of well-priced set menus at top restaurants. A starter, main course, dessert, wine and coffee is around 20 euros (about $23), for example, compared with €50 at dinner. Ms. Irurita recommended lunch at the Michelin-starred eatery Caelis, where a three-course meal with wine is €42.

SKIP CARS AND DRIVERS A car with a driver is an unnecessary expense in Barcelona. Taxis are readily available and reasonably priced, the Metro is clean and efficient and the city is very pedestrian-friendly.

Hong Kong

Hong Kong can be a cost-prohibitive vacation destination, according to Brooke Lavery, a Southeast Asia specialist and an owner of the New York City luxury travel company Local Foreigner. “Hong Kong is one of the most expensive cities in the world, but also offers a great high-low balance which can be optimized,” she said.

Ms. Lavery’s suggestions:

WHEN TO GO Hotel rates stay steady in Hong Kong throughout the year with the exception of June, July and August; these are the city’s hottest and most humid months, and hotel prices drop. However, they’re not the ideal time to visit, Ms. Lavery said, unless you don’t mind steamy weather.

STAY IN LESSER-KNOWN HOTELS Hong Kong has plenty of upscale independent and small-chain properties that are a fraction of the cost of hotels from well-known luxury brands. Examples include The Pottinger, on a stone slab street, and East HK, in the Taikoo Shing neighborhood.

SAVE ON FOOD, SPLURGE ON COCKTAILS Ms. Lavery recommended a Cantonese fine-dining experience, like Seventh Son in Wan Chai, for lunch because the tab is lower compared with dinner. For dinners, stick to inexpensive, casual joints that serve noodles or curry balls, and post-meal, head to a bar for a cocktail. “Drinks can be pricey, but you’re spending a lot less than you would on a high-end dinner,” Ms. Lavery said.

SHOP FOR CUSTOM CLOTHES Hong Kong is known for its incredible tailors, and an article of bespoke clothing is a fantastic souvenir; most tailors can turn around a piece in 48 hours. Custom shirts generally cost 300 Hong Kong dollars (about $40) while suits can run 4,000 Hong Kong dollars. The Central area is full of talented tailors like Jantzen Tailor.

WALK AND TAKE A BOAT The ideal way to see the city is to stroll through its many back alleys and get lost. Or book a walking tour; Little Adventures in Hong Kong, for example, has walks limited to five people that are led by local journalists and chefs and cost $115.

Sailing Victoria Harbor on a traditional Chinese wooden junk is a quintessential Hong Kong experience. Instead of booking an expensive private boat, go for a reasonably priced small-group tour; Aqualuna, for one, offers a range of these.

London

A luxury trip to London on a limited budget isn’t hard to pull off, according to Nicola Butler, the owner of NoteWorthy, a London travel company specializing in upscale vacations in Britain. “The favorable exchange rate between the dollar and the pound make the city an affordable vacation choice,” she said.

Ms. Butler’s advice:

WHEN TO GO Hotel rates in London soar from May through July. From early September to the end of February, however, they drop slightly. If chilly days don’t bother you, January is the cheapest month to visit. “The hotels have the lowest prices, and restaurants, theaters and museums offer deals to boost business during a quiet time,” Ms. Butler said.

SPLURGE ON TEA, SAVE ON LUNCH AND DINNER Enjoying the famous London tradition of afternoon tea at a luxury hotel like Claridge’s is 50 percent less expensive than dinner in a pricey restaurant but has the same sense of extravagance.

CULTURE IS A BARGAIN Many of London’s museums, including the Tate Modern, have free admission. Art galleries are also free, while popular attractions such as St. Paul’s Cathedral have inexpensive entry fees, and some theater houses sell discounted tickets for same-day shows.

SKIP CARS AND TAXIS Chauffeured cars and taxis in London can cost a few hundred pounds a day. Save money, soak up the city and get some exercise all at the same time by using walking as your main mode of transportation. For longer distances, rely on the Tube.

Milan

Italy’s fashion and business capital of Milan isn’t necessarily the ideal destination if you’re on a budget but enjoy high-end travel. Luca Finardi, the general manager of the Mandarin Oriental Milan, said that the city’s five-star hotels, designer stores and well-known restaurants can be expensive.

But he also said that there are ways to save.

Mr. Finardi’s tips:

WHEN TO GO Hotel rates in the city are up to 30 percent lower in November and December compared with the rest of the year. These months are Mr. Finardi’s preferred time to be in town. “The temperatures are mild, the holiday decorations are up and the atmosphere is lively,” he said.

DINE SMART Michelin-starred or otherwise pricey restaurants are common in Milan, and travelers who want to experience them should go at lunch, when the cost of a meal is substantially less than at dinner. At the two-starred Seta, for example, a three-course lunch with an amuse bouche and petits fours is €70, compared with €150 for a similar meal at dinner.

And don’t miss the Milanese tradition of going to a bar for aperitivo hour, usually from 6:30 to 8:30 p.m. Drink orders are typically accompanied by free food.

SHOP LOCAL AND HIT SALES Travelers can find well-priced fashionable ware from local designers in the many boutiques in the Isola and Brera neighborhoods. If you’re on the hunt for goods from Italy’s many internationally known luxury brands, come in January and February, when they have their sales.

WALK, BIKE AND USE PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION Mr. Finardi said that the center of Milan is small and walkable, and the public transportation system of metro lines, buses and trams is efficient and clean. To explore more expansive areas such as the scenic Parco Sempione, consider using the bike-sharing service BikeMi; daily rentals start at €4.50.

Mumbai

A luxury trip to Mumbai, India’s largest city, on a wallet-watcher’s budget isn’t hard to pull off, according to Fiona Caulfield, the founder of the India travel book series Love Travel Guides, who also lives in the country. “If you have some basic know-how, you can get a lot for your money without spending too much,” she said.

Her advice:

WHEN TO GO Mumbai hotels rates are highest from October to mid-April. Prices drop at least 30 percent until the end of September, but Ms. Caulfield said that May and June are uncomfortably hot, while July and August is the heart of monsoon season. “The end of April and September are the most value-friendly and ideal times to visit,” she said. Also, many properties offer 10 to 15 percent discounts on stays of three nights or more.

AVOID EATING AT LUXURY HOTELS Mumbai’s many five-star hotels are full of pricey restaurants that usually aren’t worth the expense. Ms. Caulfield said that travelers can save substantially by sticking to independent places. Her favorite is The Bombay Canteen, which serves regional contemporary Indian food. Time Out Mumbai has an expansive list of options.

SHOP AT BAZAARS AND MARKETS The city’s bazaars and markets sell high-quality, unique goods, and haggling to get the lowest prices is the way to go. Colaba Causeway has several street stalls that sell fashionable handcrafted leather sandals for men and women, and Chor Bazaar has vintage finds.

HIRE A PRIVATE GUIDE Compared with other large cities, private guides are a manageable expense in Mumbai. No Foot Prints and Bombaywalla are well-regarded local tour companies.

GET AROUND LIKE A LOCAL Avoid taking expensive hotel cars; taxis are safe, inexpensive and easy to hail, and Uber is also popular and affordable.

New York

A luxury vacation to New York City on a budget can be done, according to Eric J. Gordon, the owner of Beyond Times Square, a company that plans high-end New York City trips. “New York is expensive, but there are ways to have an upscale getaway without paying premium prices,” he said.

Tips from Mr. Gordon:

WHEN TO GO Hotel room prices in New York are highest from September to the first week of November, and from Thanksgiving to New Year. They’re also high in the spring and summer. In early November and from January through early March, however, they drop by around 20 percent. The city’s hotel industry is driven by business travelers, so nightly weekday rates at upscale hotels are as much as $150 more than weekend rates.

EAT STRATEGICALLY If high-end dining is a priority for you, Mr. Gordon said to plan your visit during Restaurant Week (usually at the end of January through early February, and at the end of July through early August), when a three-course lunch at some of the city’s finest restaurants is $29 and a three-course dinner is $42. And, at any time of the year, many pricey restaurants like Estiatorio Milos offer comparatively affordable prix fixe lunch and dinner menus, usually during certain hours.

CULTURE IS A BARGAIN Some of the best sightseeing in New York is inexpensive. The Metropolitan Museum of Art has $25 admission, and your ticket is also valid that day for the Met Cloisters, in Upper Manhattan, and the Met Breuer, a 10-minute walk away. The city also has free festivals and street fairs throughout the year, and Central Park, Hudson River Park and Battery Park host many free concerts.

SKIP CARS Relying on taxis or car services for transportation can add up to $100 or more a day. Take the subway or walk instead. Mr. Gordon also recommended the NYC Ferry: a one-way ride is $2.75.

Paris

An upscale vacation to Paris can be a pricey proposition, says Barkley Hickox, a Paris specialist and an owner of the New York travel consultancy Local Foreigner. But she also said that there are plenty of ways to stretch your dollar and have a high-end getaway.

Her tips:

WHEN TO GO Get the best value on hotels by visiting Paris between November and April, when they have their lowest rates. Some high-end properties offer further discounts if you book a stay several months in advance.

CHOOSE THE RIGHT ACCOMMODATIONS Families traveling to Paris should consider booking a luxury apartment through a company such as OneFineStay or Paris Perfect. It’s less expensive than booking multiple rooms at a high-end hotel, and having a kitchen to cook meals helps cut food costs. The city also has several affordable but upscale boutique properties including Maison 1400, in one of the oldest houses in the Marais district, and Le Roch Hotel & Spa, set in a 19th-century house in the heart of the city.

EAT SMART Dine at one of the city’s renowned restaurants at lunch, when the tab is much lower compared with dinner. Several popular places offer affordable midday prix fixe menus. For dinner, Ms. Hickox recommended going to restaurants in residential neighborhoods such as South Pigalle, the Haut Marais and Montmartre, where a meal with wine can be between €35 and €50 a person. In warmer weather, pick up a baguette, cheese, pastries and wine and head to Luxembourg Gardens or another park for a decadent but wallet-friendly picnic.

DITCH TAXIS AND CARS Ms. Hickox’s favorite way to explore Paris is on foot. “You can fully appreciate the city’s beauty by walking, and it’s designed for walkers because there are walking paths and sidewalks everywhere,” she said.

For longer distances, she suggested using the city’s bike share system, Vélib’ Métropole, or using the Metro.

Buenos Aires

Buenos Aires isn’t an expensive destination to begin with, and travelers seeking an upscale vacation to the city can have it without too much effort, according to Jennifer Gillmore, an Argentina expert at Travel Beyond, a travel company in Wayzata, Minn. “I know from personal experience that you can get luxury in Buenos Aires without paying luxury prices,” she said.

Her advice:

When to Go Peak season in Buenos Aires runs from November through March, Argentina’s summer, but Ms. Gillmore prefers visiting from May to September, when hotel prices drop by 15 percent or more (and temperatures are also mild). Luxury hotels such the Palacio Duhau Park Hyatt frequently offer promotions during these months: one example is paying for two nights and getting to stay for three. Breakfast is typically included.

Culture Is a Bargain Buenos Aires is part of the microtheater movement, where a series of short plays is performed over the course of the evening at small venues; tickets are usually $10 or less a person. And instead of spending money on a touristy and overpriced tango show, visit a milonga, or tango hall, where you can watch locals dance and also participate for between 137 and 219 Argentine pesos, or $5 to $8 a person.

Indulge Away High-quality meals in Buenos Aires don’t have to be costly. Parrillas, for example, serve hearty and reasonably priced steaks, while dinners with wine can be had for less than $25 a person at popular restaurants.

Take Taxis or Walk Taxis are a safe and economical way to get around; Ms. Gillmore advised having your hotel or restaurant call a radio taxi, which registers all its drivers. Her favorite way to explore the city is on foot. “The architecture, the streets and the locals is what makes Buenos Aires special, and the best way to appreciate that is by walking,” she said.

Chicago

There’s good news for travelers to Chicago who want a high-end trip: Shawna Owen, the president of Huffman Travel, a Chicago travel consultancy, said that compared with other large cities, the Midwest metropolis is relatively wallet-friendly.

“Your money will go far here, but there are ways to stretch the dollar even more,” she said.

Below, Ms. Owen’s tips:

When to Go Chicago’s upscale hotels offer great deals and their lowest rates during the first quarter of the year. In 2018, for example, the Peninsula Chicago had a promotion where guests who paid for two nights got a third night free. Nightly rates during those months started at $399, which is more than a 50 percent savings from peak season rates. Ms. Owen said that hotels also tend to offer promotions in August.

Eat Affordably Enjoying some of the city’s most popular restaurants doesn’t have to break the bank, Ms. Owen said. And, since the food portions are generous, it’s possible to split dishes and save even more money. Her top picks for reasonably priced eats include Lou Malnati’s for deep-dish pizza, Small Cheval for burgers and Publican Anker, a vibrant gastropub with creative dishes.

Soak Up Culture Chicago has a fantastic and affordable culture scene, Ms. Owen said. Admission to the Museum of Contemporary Art, which has groundbreaking exhibits from global artists, is only $15, and some theaters have discounted tickets for same-day shows. Steppenwolf, for example, allots 20 tickets priced at $20 each for some performances.

Walk or Take the L Regardless of the time of year, Chicagoans love to walk, and Ms. Huffman recommended that visitors do the same. As an alternative to walking, the L, the city’s rapid transit system, is an efficient and inexpensive way to get around.

Mexico City

There’s never been a better time to take a luxury-for-less vacation to Mexico City, according to Lillian Aviles, the director of business development for Journey Mexico, a Mexico travel company that sells upscale trips to the country. Ms. Aviles, who lives in the city, said that the peso is weak compared with the dollar, and prices, in general, are low. “You can get a lot without spending too much,” she said.

Her tips:

When to Go Mexico City is a corporate-driven market, so weekends are the time to go; weekday hotel rates can be twice as much. Prices also dip between May and September, when the weather is hot, but given the temperatures, the savings may not be worth it.

Eat Like a King High-end dining in Mexico City is a bargain compared with other large cities. Ms. Aviles’s tops picks include Limosneros, which uses pre-Hispanic ingredients like the leafy greens called quelites in modern dishes (the average dinner per person without a drink is about 466 Mexican pesos, or about $25) and Los Danzantes, which serves upscale Oaxacan cuisine (the average dinner per person without a drink also about 466 Mexican pesos).

Dining at a taco bar is another option: two or three tacos with wine will set you back between $5 and $10 a person.

Shop at Markets For the best deals on fantastic shopping, hit Mexico City’s many markets. On Saturday, for example, the San Angel neighborhood has a bazaar where local designers sell wares ranging from ceramics to jewelry, and Mexican painters sell their canvases. The daily artisan market La Ciudadella sells handmade goods from around the country.

Take Uber “Uber is inexpensive and efficient,” Ms. Aviles said.