There isn’t a woman in Washington who doesn’t traffic in at least five of the seven deadly sins. Greed, lust, envy, wrath and pride are the currencies of power in the nation’s capital, and some of its most dangerous brokers are women on television.

On “House of Cards,” the icily conniving Claire Underwood, played by Robin Wright, helped her husband, and herself, take over the White House. And television offers so many others, including Olivia Pope (Kerry Washington), the home-wrecking political fixer on “Scandal,” as well as pretty much every other prominent female on that amped-up ABC melodrama.

Then of course there is Selina Meyer, the vice president played by Julia Louis-Dreyfus on “Veep,” who has all seven Capitol vices, including sloth and a bit of gluttony.

It’s not hard to understand why so many series are based in the nation’s capital. Political terrain is familiar: Washington, like show business, is everybody’s business. In a post-9/11 age, where terrorist attacks are a real threat, not a comic book danger, it’s convenient to set tales of conspiracy and global evildoing in Senate cloakrooms and East Wing ballrooms.

But most of all, everybody hates politicians, so much so that contempt for Washington trumps even the most ingrained taboos about the portrayal of women on network television. Nobody expects a virtuous heroine in Congress or the White House.

Feminism hasn’t won every battle, but it did at least teach media executives to worry about charges of sexism or misogyny. On most network dramas, it is almost unthinkable to portray lead female characters as selfish, craven or incompetent, especially when they are serving the public good as detectives, firefighters and doctors. Heroines on series like “NCIS: Los Angeles” or “The Blacklist” are strikingly the same: strong, beautiful, dedicated and boring. Even shows with more complex heroines, like Alicia (Julianna Margulies), the governor’s mate-turned-lawyer in “The Good Wife,” don’t veer far from the norm. Alicia gives in to some temptations, but over all she is an honorable person professionally and personally — so much so that in a skit on Fuse the comedian Billy Eichner invented a coloring book about her good deeds.

On that show, even stupid women turn out to be smart. “The Good Wife” has cornered the market on the ditz savant. For a while, it was Mamie Gummer, who played a young, blond shark posing as a naïve, inexperienced lawyer. Now there is Robyn (Jess Weixler), a spacey blond investigator who unerringly scopes out the truth. Most of all there is Elsbeth (Carrie Preston), a loony redheaded lawyer who is actually brilliant.

There are a few old-school villainesses on prime time, notably Madeleine Stowe as Victoria, an alluring, ruthless socialite on the soapy ABC drama “Revenge.” But that show, which is set in the Hamptons, is more of an arch throwback to “Dynasty” and “Knots Landing” than it is a reflection of contemporary mores. “Nashville,” on ABC, couldn’t sustain an Eve Harrington in a lead role, and accordingly the bad girl played by Hayden Panettiere has developed a soul.

On broadcast networks comedies have more leeway, though it is interesting that one of the most ambitious, self-centered sitcom heroines in the 1980s and ’90s was a high-powered Washington journalist, Murphy Brown.

Even premium television, with its penchant for the dark side, gives most of its heroines flaws that are transgressive but also forgivable. Edie Falco is a nurse with an addiction on “Nurse Jackie” (Showtime) and on “Orange Is the New Black” (Netflix), Taylor Schilling plays a woman serving time on drug charges. Both women are likable, even when their actions are not. That’s what makes “Girls” on HBO so distinctive: Lena Dunham’s shallow slackers are not nice or noble.

The more glaring exception is Washington, where there is apparently nothing sexist or old school about painting women as venal, self-serving and manipulative.

“Scandal” is a nighttime soap in a contemporary setting, and while the plot lines — conspiracy, assassinations, blackmail — have grown ever more absurd, what doesn’t get old is the bad behavior of its lead women. Olivia is ostensibly the heroine, and she is sleeping with the president as well as his old friend and top-secret intelligence enforcer. Mellie (Bellamy Young), the angel-faced first lady, lies, schemes and recently in the Oval Office slapped her husband in the face, screaming, “You take everything from me!”

Neither of them are any match for Vice President Sally Langston (Kate Burton), a born-again Christian who murdered her husband and wants to destroy the president who put her on the ticket. The show’s creator, Shonda Rhimes, who invented more nuanced characters on her first hit series, “Grey’s Anatomy,” can get away with all these grotesque caricatures of women because they work in Washington — viewers expect no less.

It’s not just elected officials who are pilloried; female government servants of all kinds are suspect.

On “The Americans,” on FX, there is good reason: The series follows a team of K.G.B. agents who pose as ordinary married suburbanites in the Reagan era. There, too, heroines do terrible things. Elizabeth (Keri Russell) allowed an informant to strangle her protégée, a young Nicaraguan revolutionary, because the girl’s ardor could jeopardize the mission Moscow assigned them. Greed put Nina (Annet Mehendru), an employee at the Russian Embassy, into the clutches of the F.B.I., though lust, especially other people’s, has kept her aloft and busy stealing secrets from both sides.

The joke of “Parks and Recreation” is that its heroine, Leslie Knope (Amy Poehler), is a public servant who is actually dedicated and idealistic — a mischievous volte-face of viewer expectations. “Veep” is a comedy that swims with the tide and is absolutely brutal about politics.

Selina, now running for president, is told she has to explain her position on abortion, and one aide suggests she give her perspective as a woman. “No, no, no,” Selina hisses, horrified. “I can’t identify myself as a woman. People can’t know that. Men hate that, and women who hate women hate that — which I believe is most women.”

The Amazon series “Alpha House,” about Republican senators sharing a house, is sweeter, but just as knowing, and there, too, Cynthia Nixon and Wanda Sykes play Democratic senators who if anything are even wilier than their G.O.P. counterparts.

The Web series “Chasing the Hill” is a cynical, cinéma vérité-like look at campaigns that seems written more in sadness than in satire: It’s “Veep” for the readers of Roll Call. Robin Weigert plays Kristi Ryan, a congresswoman from California who faces a tough re-election battle. Kristi isn’t a monster, but she is hardly a role model: She is as jaundiced, short-tempered and self-centered as any other member of Congress. She’s not as wicked as Claire on “House of Cards”; she’s closer to Jackie Sharp (Molly Parker), that series’s unprincipled, manipulative majority whip. Jackie is in her own way more interesting than Claire, because she struggles, however briefly, with her conscience before betraying friends and colleagues. Fictional dramas are so drawn to Washington villainesses in part because it is still dangerous in real life to attack female politicians. Emily’s List, the political action committee that backs female candidates who support abortion rights, has turned sexist remarks into a useful fund-raising tool. Even Hillary Clinton, who is so often pilloried, manages to recast some attacks. Her supporters put a misogynist spin on Barack Obama’s put-down in a 2008 debate when he called Mrs. Clinton “likable enough.”

Most television documentaries about real-life politicians are guarded, if not flattering. That’s because so few women have had the chance to wield and abuse their power in a way that inspires a warts-and-all portrait like the one of Lyndon B. Johnson in the Broadway play “All the Way” — though Mrs. Clinton and Nancy Pelosi are nearly there.

Showtime recently presented a biography, “Geraldine Ferraro: Paving the Way,” directed by its subject’s daughter, Donna Zaccaro, that was so positive — and defensive about the financial dealings of Ferraro’s husband — that it was almost a disservice. Ferraro, the congresswoman from Queens, was the first woman nominated for vice president by a major party, and she was more interesting than she was saintly. “All About Ann: Governor Richards of the Lone Star State,” on HBO, a similarly glowing portrait of Ann Richards, the former Texas governor who died in 2006, was a lot less forthcoming about her rockier passages than she was.

And that kind of restraint makes it all the more tempting to create fictional versions who are as corrupt and conniving in public office as their male counterparts.

There is gender equality of a kind in Washington. On television, it’s the one place where it’s safe to say that women are as bad as the men.