CHICAGO

WHAT: A condominium with two bedrooms and two bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $799,000

SIZE: 2,200 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $363

SETTING: This condo overlooks Lake Michigan in a neighborhood called Lakeview, about four miles north of downtown Chicago. The area is characterized by prewar apartment buildings and businesses ranging from low-key laundromats to upscale restaurants. The city’s elevated subway stops nearby, as does a bus along the lake. There is a large park and golf course across the street; a bike path along the water extends nearly 20 miles.

INDOORS: The apartment is in a 17-story 1927 stone building designed by the Chicago architect B. Leo Steif. The building is unusually narrow, only about two rooms deep, allowing for a surprising amount of light given the structure’s vintage.

This unit is on the eighth floor. The interior has deep crown molding, original hardwood floors, a barrel-vaulted ceiling in the foyer and an ornate mantel over the fireplace in the living room. The living room measures nearly 360 square feet and opens to a dining room of nearly the same size through a wide doorway. Both have large picture windows.

Kitchen fixtures include contemporary flat-panel maple cabinets, concrete countertops and stainless-steel appliances, as well as a Sputnik-style chandelier. The kitchen opens to a sitting room with a partial wall separating it from an informal dining area, both with large picture windows.

The window in the master bedroom overlooks Lake Shore Drive. The master bathroom, expanded during renovations over the past 15 years, has a steam shower lined with green slate and a custom vanity with two sinks. The second bathroom is also finished in dark green slate, and has a soaking tub. The unit conveys with the right to rent a parking space in an adjoining garage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: Common gardens on the ground floor

TAXES: $7,639 a year, plus $1,289 a month in association dues

CONTACT: Tracy Dillard and Bohdan Gorczynski, Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices KoenigRubloff Realty Group, (312) 893-3557 / (312) 893-1364; 3800nlakeshore8e.koenigrubloff.com

•

NEW ORLEANS

WHAT: A center-hall cottage with four bedrooms and two bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $799,000

SIZE: 2,682 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $298

SETTING: This two-story house is on a corner lot in the Touro Bouligny section of Uptown New Orleans, a neighborhood characterized by raised center-hall cottages on narrow lots just inland from the Mississippi River and adjoining the Garden District.

Historic St. Charles Avenue, a picturesque thoroughfare of live oaks and early-20th-century mansions, is a few blocks north; shopping and dining are along Magazine Street a few blocks south. The house is near the Mardi Gras parade route, too.

INDOORS: The cottage was built in the 1860s and given a crisp renovation over the past 10 years. A blend of old and new, the interior has original plaster ceiling medallions, molding, cypress doors and mantels, juxtaposed with the kind of clean lines and light fixtures one might see in a contemporary. Floors are a pale pickled wood.

Formal living and dining rooms are up a flight of stairs from the street, with a garden level downstairs. The current owners removed walls on either side of a chimney between the rooms, creating a two-sided columnar fireplace with original mantels. Ceilings are 11.5 feet tall.

Three of the bedrooms are on this level. The fourth is on the garden level. Here, there are also a den and a large family room measuring about 225 square feet with white wood-paneled walls and a glass door opening to a brick courtyard. The house also has a garage, with space for storage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The side courtyard is shaded and landscaped, with a fountain. The house has a deep front porch.

TAXES: Approximately $10,735 a year as a primary residence; approximately $11,847 otherwise

CONTACT: Lynda DePanicis, New Orleans Property Shoppe, (504) 583-8207; nopropertyshoppe.com

•

KIRKWOOD, PA.

WHAT: A stone house with four bedrooms and three bathrooms, on 10 acres

HOW MUCH: $799,000

SIZE: Approximately 3,600 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $222

SETTING: Kirkwood is a rural town in Lancaster County, about 60 miles from Philadelphia and 50 miles from Wilmington, Del. Most of the area is agricultural, with small farm stands throughout town. This stone and stucco house is on 10 wooded acres off a winding country road next to Octoraro Creek, a tributary of the Susquehanna River stocked with trout for fishing. Shopping and services are about six miles away in Quarryville or 20 miles away in the city of Lancaster, where there’s an Amtrak station; the ride into Philadelphia takes about an hour.

INDOORS: The three-story stone-and-stucco house was built about 1790 and has undergone various renovations and expansions, the last of which were about five years ago. The interior has low wood-beam ceilings, rich pine floors, wide fireplaces and six-over-six windows. Walls in the oldest part of the house are the original textured stucco.

The front door opens to a sunny hallway with tall opposing windows and a brick floor. At one end of the hall is a sunny sitting room with a pitched beamed ceiling and a fireplace. At the other end is the kitchen, which has been updated with dark granite countertops and stainless-steel appliances, offsetting the wood cabinetry and simple open shelves.

The formal living room has a wide fireplace with a gas insert and French doors opening to a patio. Beyond this is the formal dining room.

Bedrooms are on the second and third floors. Because the house is built into an embankment, the second-floor master bedroom has French doors opening to the backyard. It has a fireplace, and a sitting area underneath a pitch in the ceiling. The en-suite master bathroom also has a fireplace, opposite a soaking tub underneath a clerestory window. The third story has a bedroom, as well as an office with a small balcony overlooking a yard.

The property has a two-story workshop and art studio with a pitched ceiling and garage-style doors. Next to it is a two-car garage.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The lot is 10.34 acres. Behind the house, there’s a backyard; on one side is a stone patio with a pergola, and beyond that, a large gazebo.

TAXES: $4,850 a year

CONTACT: Sherry Merrill, Lusk & Associates Sotheby’s International Realty, (717) 475-0488 / (717) 291-9101; luskandassociates.com