YEKATERINBURG, Russia — Before he began appearing at film festivals and collecting literary awards, when he was just another resourceful punk from Russia’s rust belt, Vassily Sigarev had a job delivering prostitutes to their customers in the concrete-slab housing blocks of Nizhny Tagil.

He would park on the street of that industrial city in the Urals and wait for the women and their clients to finish. The women would return, smeared or bleary or all business, and take their seat beside a driver who was wordless and expressionless, his hand grooved with scar tissue, like a character from a Martin Scorsese film.

It would have surprised them to know they were being driven by the future Bard of the Urals — a self-taught writer who would go on to win literary prizes from Moscow to London and introduce audiences in Britain, Washington and now New York to the underside of the Russian provinces. This month, when his play “Black Milk” opened at the East 13th Street Theater in New York, reviewers sounded mostly exhausted by 100 minutes in Mr. Sigarev’s world, and no wonder. His scripts are full of abuse, drunkenness and cruelty — not the Shakespearean kind, rooted in character, but the cruelty of a debased society in which parents have ceased to care for their children and children will commit any sacrilege for cash.

Mr. Sigarev, 35, is one of the most controversial dramatists and film directors working in Russia, a fact that was underlined this spring when his second film, “Living,” deeply split a jury at a German film festival. The head of the jury, the Romanian director Cristi Puiu, passionately and successfully defended the film for its emotional honesty, saying its merciless gaze on the pain of bereavement was an “act of courage.” The detractors were so vehement that two of them nearly withdrew from the voting.

These arguments have followed Mr. Sigarev for years, particularly in Russia, where establishment filmmakers accuse him of currying favor with the West by portraying Russia in such dark colors. But Mr. Sigarev has kept producing one harrowing tale after another — of a mother pimping out her daughter, a son stealing his mother’s pension to buy booze, of drug addicts collecting grave markers to sell as scrap metal, and of the crushing blows that await the very young. He explains this rawness, in part, as a matter of geography.

“In Moscow it’s done more from the head, I mean drama is,” he said in an interview last week. “Here there is more raw emotion. And generally speaking we are different. We are harder. Melodrama is not our genre.”

Mr. Sigarev has documented a historical moment, as Russia’s industrial cities were jolted by the arrival of capitalism. His own narrative starts with the collapse of the Soviet Union, which happened the year he turned 14. To a boy growing up in the titanium-mining center of Verkhnaya Salda it was like a bell that set off in him a decade-long scramble for cash — by jumping a train to Moscow and lugging back black-market VCRs, or selling cinder blocks, but especially by digging for scrap titanium, an activity that could bring an enterprising teenager $100 a day.

Mr. Sigarev’s younger brother, Yura, had a kind of genius for it. But when heroin dealers set up shop in Verkhnaya Salda, half of Mr. Sigarev’s friends became addicts, and Yura was one of them. Mr. Sigarev said he beat his brother with a belt when he found out about the drugs. He also brought him along when he confronted the drug dealer.

“I went there, and we sorted it out in the Russian way,” he said. “Well, blood was spilled. They quit selling drugs at that place.”

Mr. Sigarev is an unnerving storyteller: movie-star handsome but loath to smile or make eye contact, and so soft-spoken as to be nearly inaudible. No one seems to know how closely his scripts reflect his own family life, or if they do at all. His former writing coach warned, with a note of unmistakable admiration, that “he can tell you stories, and you believe him.”

Here’s the story about what he did to his brother’s drug dealer:

“I did not touch him. I cut my finger and smeared him all with blood. He was awfully scared.”

Asked how he became a writer, Mr. Sigarev said he did it alone, “like a weed.” His father was an electrician, and his mother was a collective-farm worker. As a teenager, impressed by the horror novels of Stephen King, he showed his mother a story he had written about one of her friends committing a murder and noted with satisfaction that it made her cry. At 21, a student at a teachers college, he spotted a poster seeking applicants for a playwriting course in Yekaterinburg, the regional capital.

Nikolai V. Kolyada, a playwright and teacher whose theater has made this industrial region a center of modern drama, recalled the applicant as watchful and silent, sitting in the back row with his arms folded.

“He was quiet — ‘No, yes, no, yes,’ ” Mr. Kolyada recalled. “I asked him: ‘You came from Nizhny Tagil on the commuter train, right? What did you read on the way?’ And he named an author I had never heard of in my life, and I said, ‘O.K., I’ll take you.’ “

What happened then was like a dam bursting. Mr. Sigarev was then working for $100 a month as a security guard at a coke-producing plant, spending 24-hour shifts in a small trailer when he was not chauffeuring prostitutes. In the trailer he wrote 15 plays — “People stole whatever they wanted, I did not care,” he recalled cheerfully. One day Mr. Kolyada received a hellish coming-of-age story about a boy who is expelled from school, pummeled by street thugs and lured to an apartment where he and his friends are raped by drunken, middle-aged men. The play is at times very funny and, with its stripped-down language, almost impossible to forget.

Mr. Kolyada made exactly one edit, replacing Mr. Sigarev’s original title, “The Fall of Innocence,” with the name “Plasticine.”

“I said, ‘Vasya, you can relax, because you have written the main play of your life,’ “ Mr. Kolyada recalled. “He said, ‘I’m going to live a little while longer, Nikolai Vladimirovich.’ “

“Plasticine” won prizes in Moscow and kept going, opening at the Royal Court Theater in London in 2002. Mr. Sigarev won the annual award for most promising playwright from The Evening Standard of London, and his second major play, “Black Milk,” was produced in England to equal fanfare. After the blast of fame, he kept a distance from his contemporaries. A reporter from The Guardian, sent to Yekaterinburg to profile this young sensation, arrived to find that Mr. Sigarev was on a five-day alcoholic bender.

“There is a professional jealousy,” said Sasha Dugdale, who has translated many of Mr. Sigarev’s plays into English. “There is also a feeling that he was writing things that shouldn’t have been written.” She understands what they mean. Translating the brutal violence inflicted on the young hero of “Plasticine,” she said, made her feel physically ill. But she sees the work as idealistic, focused on young and vulnerable characters as they confront a world that can be merciless.

“The idealism is almost in the negative,” she said. “We’re not supposed to emerge from these plays thinking, ‘I must be really hard, I must defend myself.’ We are supposed to weep.”

Last week Mr. Sigarev sat in the apartment he bought with his 2002 prize winnings — unpainted, like a warehouse, but fitted with reminders of the world of his childhood, a skull-rattling school bell and an industrial light in a wire cage like those used in factories. He said he had hoped filming “Living,” three parallel tales of wrenching personal loss, would shake his recent preoccupation with death. But it has not, and he cannot watch it.

“Living” stars Mr. Sigarev’s wife, Yana Troyanova, an actress who manages to be simultaneously repugnant and luminous, and so at home in small-town Russia that, as The Moscow News put it recently, “Even a long string of curse words can suddenly turn poetic.”

These days Mr. Sigarev has no shortage of opportunities. The government has financed both his films, and he has received repeated invitations in Russia to direct blockbusters using other writers’ screenplays. He refuses them.

“The main thing for my reputation is not to do something to be ashamed of later,” he said. “As for what people think or say about me, I couldn’t care less.”