WASHINGTON — When Tagg Romney, the eldest of Mitt and Ann Romney’s five sons, was not quite 12, he decided, in a fit of adolescent rebellion, that his father was a nerd.

“Everything he did bugged me,” the younger Mr. Romney recalled. “I think it broke his heart because he had been my hero, and all of a sudden, I didn’t want anything to do with him.”

But if Mitt Romney’s squeaky-clean, straight-arrow image bothered his teenage son, those traits are the ones Tagg Romney and his square-jawed brothers will be selling to the public this week in Tampa, Fla., as their father accepts the Republican nomination for the presidency.

For a campaign still struggling to humanize its candidate, the sprawling Romney clan — five sons, their wives and 18 grandchildren — provides a camera-ready tableau that helps emphasize a point his advisers are eager to underscore: no matter what voters think of his politics and policies, Mr. Romney is a successful father and family man.

“We’ll be working on telling the Mitt Romney story, and certainly a big part of the Mitt Romney story is his family,” said Russ Schriefer, a senior Romney strategist. “One of the real organizing principles of his life is his relationship with Ann and with the boys.”

All five Romney sons — Tagg, 42; Matt, 40; Josh, 37; Ben, 34 and Craig, 31 — will attend the Republican convention, acting as surrogates for their father. Craig Romney, who speaks Spanish, is expected to introduce Hispanic leaders Thursday night, and the brothers will give interviews, meet with delegations, host donor events and appear on stage after Mitt Romney delivers his acceptance speech.

The intensity of their involvement is a departure from the Romney campaign’s early days, when the sons were asked by advisers to take a lower profile. Though they were intimately involved in Mr. Romney’s first run for the White House in 2008 — they visited all 99 counties in Iowa in the campaign R.V. known as the “Mittmobile” and chronicled their doings in a G-rated “Five Brothers” blog — advisers concluded this time around that their “Leave It to Beaver” persona was out of sync with the “Modern Family” era. But over time, the brothers returned to the trail.

In some respects, the Romney family is a like a mini-corporation, with its own mission statement and core values, passed from father to son, beginning with Mr. Romney’s father, George, the former governor of Michigan and failed 1968 presidential candidate, whose presence still looms large over the clan.

Richard Eyre, a family friend who worked on George Romney’s campaign, said Mr. Romney, a faithful Mormon, subscribes to the maxim of a former president of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: “No other success can compensate for failure in the home.”

Although he was working long hours at Bain Capital, the private equity firm he founded, Mr. Romney tried to keep his work separate from his home life. “When he walked in the door, he was excited to see everybody,” recalled Tagg Romney. “You didn’t know if he had a good day or a bad day at the office.”

Sundays were for church. When Tagg Romney, then 14, was invited to a birthday party on a Sunday, his parents frowned at the idea. “We said: ‘No. This is where you’re supposed to be, at church, not birthday parties,’ ” Ann Romney said in an interview. But she and her husband also left it to Tagg to make his own decision. He chose to go to the party.

“When I got home he didn’t say, ‘What did you think?’ ” the younger Mr. Romney recalled of his father. “But I remember feeling, ‘This was a mistake, this wasn’t a typical Sunday.’ ”

Mondays, following the custom of the Mormon faith, were “family nights,” a time for games and stories, usually wrapped around a moral lesson. “Sometimes it was how to deal with bullies if you’re getting bullied at school,” Tagg Romney said. “Sometimes it was a story about Daniel in the lion’s den. When we were little they would have us act it out.”

The Romneys often opened their spacious home in the Boston suburb of Belmont, Mass., for cookouts and church-related youth activities. Michael Clark, a friend of Craig Romney, described the Romney house — which had a pool, tennis courts, a basketball hoop and video games — as “our home base.”

Mr. Romney expected his teenage sons to find jobs. Matt Romney took tickets at a local movie theater. In hopes of curing Tagg’s adolescent rebellion through hard work, his parents sent him to live with his maternal grandparents one summer, where he scrubbed boats for a company that his grandfather owned.

Mr. Romney’s child-rearing instincts drew from his father’s example, but also departed from it. George Romney, a self-made millionaire, was a man of big ideas and big opinions, who steered his youngest child, Mitt, into politics. But Mitt Romney adopted a less forceful, more open approach to being a parent.

“I think Mitt probably has even more open discussion about life, about things that are important and not important,” said Scott Romney, Mitt’s older brother. “I know he’s had serious discussions with each of his boys before they’ve gotten married or before they make major decisions.”

Nor did Mr. Romney try to direct his son’s choice of careers. George Romney pressured his son to attend Harvard Law School, despite Mitt’s preference for business school. (He wound up pursuing a joint degree program in law and business at Harvard.) “My dad never, sometimes to an extreme, would tell us what do for a career or for a school,” Tagg Romney said.

Even so, three of the five Romney sons followed in their father’s footsteps; Tagg, Matt and Josh Romney all went to Harvard Business School. Ben Romney is completing his medical residency, while Craig Romney earned a master’s degree in real estate development from Columbia.

But though both Mr. and Mrs. Romney credit George Romney for urging them into politics, they are not necessarily prepared to push their sons, even though both Tagg and Josh have toyed with running for office.

“Of course we expect them to do service,” Mrs. Romney said. “But I personally would recommend my children never go into politics, and Mitt would probably feel the same way.”

She added, “Yes, the baton will be passed, and yes, it’s expected to be passed, but whether it’s in politics or the service of others, I don’t know.”