Arthur Gelb, who by sheer force of personality was a dominant figure at The New York Times for decades, lifting its metropolitan and arts coverage to new heights and helping to shape the paper in its modern era, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan. He was 90.

His son Peter Gelb, the general manager of the Metropolitan Opera in New York, said the cause was complications of a stroke.

Hired as a copy boy in 1944, Mr. Gelb rose to become a singular Times figure in the second half of the 20th century, leaving a large stamp as critic, chief cultural correspondent, metropolitan editor, deputy managing editor and managing editor, the post he held when he retired at the end of 1989.

No matter the role, Mr. Gelb, a gangly 6-foot-2, was relentless, fidgety and in-your-face — whether in passionate response to a potential scoop or in fevered reaction to the whim of a fellow boss, typically the equally relentless A. M. Rosenthal, who had been two years his senior at City College and perpetually a step ahead of him in the Times hierarchy, finally reaching the newsroom’s top post, executive editor.

Mr. Gelb, writing for the culture pages, discovered stars in an expanding Off Broadway universe. His reviews and news coverage helped propel the fledgling careers of, among others, Woody Allen, Barbra Streisand, Dick Gregory, Lenny Bruce, Jason Robards, Joseph Papp and Colleen Dewhurst.

As a top editor he played a vital role, beginning in the 1970s, in conceiving and executing daily stand-alone sections — SportsMonday, Science Times, Dining, Home, Weekend — as well as special magazines on Sundays. All of them expanded and deepened news coverage while becoming durable vehicles for advertising in challenging economic times. Other newspapers emulated them widely.

Under Mr. Gelb’s watch as metropolitan editor, The Times’s investigation of systemic police corruption, spurred by revelations by Officer Frank Serpico, redeemed the paper’s sometimes gushing embrace of Mayor John V. Lindsay’s administration and led to the creation of the Knapp Commission, which prompted reforms.

Arthur Sulzberger Jr., the publisher of The Times, said in a statement on Tuesday that Mr. Gelb “brought great energy and insight to our journalism.”

Mr. Gelb also initiated or oversaw prizewinning investigations that exposed a virulent American Nazi’s hidden Jewish heritage, a modest suburban girl’s secret life as a drug addict on the Lower East Side and the illicit provenance of an ancient Greek vase that had been smuggled out of Italy and prominently displayed in the Metropolitan Museum of Art (whose board included the paper’s publisher at the time, Arthur O. Sulzberger).

Mr. Gelb and Mr. Rosenthal jointly edited several anthologies of Times articles, columns and obituaries. They also became embroiled in a well-publicized controversy over the author Jerzy Kosinski, their friend, whom The Village Voice accused of plagiarism and other literary crimes in 1982.

Attacked for shielding him, they commissioned a 6,000-word riposte in the Arts & Leisure section arguing that Mr. Kosinski had been the victim of a smear campaign engineered by the Communist government of his native Poland. Years later, reviewing a Kosinski biography, the critic Edward Neuert wrote on Salon: “It is clear now that Kosinski’s most energetic construction was his life.”

In his book “Behind the Times: Inside the New New York Times,” Edwin Diamond, a former Times reporter, wrote in 1993 that Mr. Rosenthal and Mr. Gelb “were much too smart to influence a critic to write a puff review,” but that “they did not hesitate to push for favorable mention of friends in the news pages.”

Known for nurturing young talent, Mr. Gelb developed a long roster of protégés, including Maureen Dowd, Paul Goldberger, Ada Louise Huxtable, Michiko Kakutani, Frank Rich and John Rockwell, the chief rock music critic.

“He has that surprisingly rare quality in an editor,” the author Renata Adler, a former Times movie critic, said. “He makes you want to write.”

He also cultivated a second career, with his wife, Barbara, as an authority on the playwright Eugene O’Neill. They published two definitive volumes testifying to O’Neill’s influence as a major American cultural figure.

Mr. Gelb met Barbara Stone, the niece of the violinist Jascha Heifetz and the stepdaughter of The New Yorker writer and playwright S. N. Behrman, in the Times newsroom, where both were working as clerks. They married in 1946, the same year he graduated from N.Y.U. She survives him. Besides his son Peter, Mr. Gelb is also survived by another son, Michael, who designs and builds homes in Massachusetts; four grandchildren (including David Gelb, who directed the documentary film “Jiro Dreams of Sushi”); and one great-grandchild.

Mr. Gelb himself conceded: “I’m not sure I would have wanted to work for me when I was an editor. I was well aware that not every reporter was eager to chase down the countless (if sometimes dubious) leads I proposed — and some eyed me as though I were some kind of madman.”

But he remembered getting sweet revenge after one particularly frustrating cat-and-mouse game with his staff.

“Just before noon one day, I walked around the city room asking one reporter after another if he happened to be free,” he said. “The first four I approached claimed they were tied up on assignments I’d given them earlier. The fifth, Peter Millones, allowed that he was available. ‘Here’s a ticket to the World Series,’ I said.”

For all his bravado, he sometimes stopped to take the measure of himself.

Once, as an editor, he cornered a reporter and genially began: “You know what the guys say about me ...”

“Oh, sure,” the reporter replied matter-of-factly.

“What?” Mr. Gelb demanded.