A FIVE-BEDROOM HOUSE ON THE WATER NEAR SYDNEY

$2 MILLION (2.25 MILLION AUSTRALIAN DOLLARS)

This 10-year-old cedar-and-glass house is one of nine secluded homes built around the edge of Little Lovett Bay, an inlet accessible only by boat less than an hour from Sydney.

A deck at the water’s edge looks south across the bay, which is frequented by dolphins and calm enough for swimming. The open living room has timber floors and a wood-burning stove. The kitchen is connected to the outdoor deck with folding timber windows, and skylights bring in sunlight filtered through the spotted gum trees that surround the house. The countertops are granite, and the stainless steel sink and drain board match the stainless steel gas appliances. A built-in bookcase holds cookbooks.

The ground floor has two guest bedrooms and a full bath. An additional downstairs room could be used as a bedroom or a formal living room.

The master suite is upstairs, and includes a bedroom with a peaked ceiling, an en suite bathroom with a soaking tub and a sitting area. A walkway suspended above the living room connects the master suite with another bedroom and an office nook.

The houses in this tight-knit community of artists and writers back up on Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park, a wild expanse of pristine bush that is home to koalas, kangaroos, parrots and kookaburras. The park is crisscrossed with a trail system for walking and cycling, but there are no roads in the immediate area. Many area residents are passionate about yachting, and there are quirky restaurants accessible only by boat where locals go to socialize and hear live music. The nearest groceries are a 10-minute boat ride away in Church Point.

A small motorboat is included in the price of the house, and many Lovett Bay residents keep a car parked in Church Point. From there it’s a 45-minute drive to Sydney’s central business district. The airport is another 10 minutes away.

MARKET OVERVIEW

The Sydney market has picked up in the last 12 months, with price gains as high as 10 percent in some areas, according to Noel Nicholson, a sales agent based in Sydney at LJ Hooker Palm Beach. “There’s more confidence in the market, the economy is doing better, and people can see value,” he said. Price gains have been strongest near the city’s central business district. Mr. Nicholson said the waterfront communities around the city have also benefited from a stronger market, but this has manifested as an increase in sales rather than in price gains.

Experts expect prices to climb another 5 to 10 percent in 2014, according to John McGrath, the chief executive of McGrath Estate Agents in Sydney. A high-quality home on the water costs 4 million to 10 million Australian dollars (around $3.6 million to $9 million), Mr. Nicholson said. But if the home is only accessible by boat, the price goes down a lot. There are about 500 homes in the Sydney area that are only accessible by boat, according to Sally Taylor, an agent with Unique Estates who has the listing.

In the Lovett Bay area, Mr. Nicholson said a well-appointed waterfront home without road access costs between 2 and 3 million Australian dollars.

WHO BUYS IN AUSTRALIA

“There’s been a flood of international buyers into Sydney in particular, but also Melbourne and Brisbane,” Ms. Taylor said. She said many foreigners have been tempted by the lower Australian dollar, which has drawn buyers from Hong Kong and Singapore, England and other parts of Europe. In addition, “there’s been a phenomenal amount of buying activity by Chinese buyers over the past two years,” she said. Mr. McGrath said that Chinese buyers are attracted because “Australia is close to their homeland and in the same business time zone.”

BUYING BASICS

Foreign buyers are prohibited from buying resale homes in Australia unless they have a residency permit. “While the place of your residency is Australia, you can own property,” Ms. Taylor said. New properties or homes being sold off-plan must be approved by the Foreign Investment Review Board, and are generally eligible for purchase by nonresident foreigners.

Mr. McGrath said about 9,800 foreign real estate investments were approved by the Foreign Investment Review Board in 2012, up from around 4,700 in 2009. Transaction costs consist of legal fees averaging 1,500 Australian dollars, and a stamp duty based on the price of the home. The stamp duty for this home will be about 109,500 Australian dollars, according to Ms. Taylor.

WEBSITES

Ku-ring-gai Chase National Park: environment.nsw.gov.au

Sydney tourism: sydney.com

Tourism Australia: australia.com

LANGUAGES AND CURRENCY

English; dollar (1 Australian dollar = $0.90)

TAXES AND FEES

Council taxes are 1,641 Australian dollars per year, and owners of this house will have to pay an additional 270 Australian dollars a year for use of the house’s private jetty. Because the jetty extends past the waterline, it is not eligible for private ownership and council rates are required for its use, according to Ms. Taylor.

CONTACT

Sally Taylor, Unique Estates, 011-61-411-21- 64-62; uniqueestates.com.au