MARTINBOROUGH, New Zealand

THERE is no Pandora. But Pounui Ridge, roughly 20 miles from this Wairarapa Valley wine town, comes close.

There is the 3-D Imax-scale view for instance. Toward the south is the open Pacific, stretching 2,000 miles, straight to Antarctica. The choppy waters of Cook Strait lie to the west, with the jagged mountains of New Zealand’s South Island rising in snowcapped splendor in the distance.

Pandora, James Cameron’s mythical “Avatar” planet, overflows with odd wildlife, and so does Pounui. Consider the eels. After living in a freshwater lake here, they slither to the sea and spawn near the faraway island of Tonga. In a life cycle rooted in Miocene times, their elvers — leaf-shaped offspring — ride the currents back to Lake Pounui.

And when the next eels arrive, oddly enough, they may spot Mr. Cameron. “I’m anxious to throw on a scuba tank and get down there,” he said by phone the other day.

This year, shortly before his solo trip to the bottom of the Mariana Trench, Mr. Cameron, the filmmaker-adventurer, spent an estimated $16 million to buy 2,500 acres of farmland around Lake Pounui (pronounced po-NEW-ee). Now he expects to absorb its magic while creating some of his own in a pair of sequels that will build on the story of Pandora and on an ecological mythos that helped make “Avatar,” released by 20th Century Fox in 2009, the biggest-selling film of all time.

In a country that is now strongly identified in the world’s imagination with Peter Jackson and his “Lord of the Rings” films, Mr. Cameron arrives with the promise of not just an outsider’s eye but also a new national brand and a next wave of employment for hundreds of New Zealanders who are expected to work on “Avatar 2” and “Avatar 3.” (News media reports of “Avatar 4” are premature, although Mr. Cameron hasn’t ruled it out.)

The prospect excites New Zealand’s government, which is counting on big-budget Hollywood-style filmmaking as a growth industry. Mr. Jackson is at work on “The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey” and a sequel, “There and Back Again,” but adding Mr. Cameron’s professional presence permanently — he shot parts of the first “Avatar” in Wellington and completed its visual effects work there — would almost certainly “move the dial” of the national economy, said Steven Joyce, the country’s economic development minister.

Still, Mr. Cameron’s purchase of the Lake Pounui property has also coincided with escalating fears here about a land grab by wealthy foreigners. Recently, for instance, New Zealanders had a conniption over the sale of 16 dairy farms to a Chinese company. (A court fight over the deal continues.) Mr. Cameron’s arrival added fuel to the media fire. “Hordes are bound to follow from Hollywood,” Stephen Oliver wrote in The Waikato Times on April 2, poking fun at the outcry by envisioning pristine hillsides “festooned with trophy homes” in an “obscene showcase of bad taste.”

Some of Mr. Cameron’s new neighbors seem to have an open mind. But most worry about his ability to inhabit this paradise without becoming the kind of disrupter he pilloried in “Avatar.” Will the millions he plunked down for the property increase everyone’s taxes? What about continued access to Lake Pounui for the eel researchers at Victoria University of Wellington? Mr. Cameron has already closed a little hall on his land that had been used for wedding receptions, thus severing the public from what locals now refer to as “his lake.”

There is also the question of what Mr. Cameron farms. To obtain governmental approval to buy the land, he had to agree to keep at least part of it as a working farm. But the current operation — built mostly around cows — poses a problem for Mr. Cameron, who said his wife, Suzy Amis, had pushed him and their children toward a plant-based diet. “So we’re looking for something more crop based,” Mr. Cameron explained. “I don’t want to be a hypocrite.”

‘WHO IS James Cameron?”

Adrienne Staples, mayor of the South Wairarapa District Council, recalls that being her first reaction when told in early February that a supposedly famous filmmaker had bought farmland in her zone.

It was not a particularly easy day for Ms. Staples. An avid horsewoman, she was trying to impregnate a mare with semen being flown to Wellington from a Spanish stallion on the South Island. She drove across the Rimutaka Range, twice, to get the semen; juggled calls from the press; and offered to bake Mr. Cameron a cake, because, after all, this is rural New Zealand.

The district and its three principal towns — Featherston, Greytown and Martinborough — have fewer than 10,000 total residents.

There is one world-class resort, Wharekauhau, which nestles almost against the coast, at the valley’s south end. It is owned by a wealthy American, William Foley, who made his mark as the chief executive of Fidelity National Financial. Other members of the financial or film elite with property in the area include the retired hedge fund tycoon Julian H. Robertson Jr. Mr. Cameron’s close neighbors are Patsy Reddy, chairwoman of the New Zealand film commission, and her husband, Sir David Gascoigne, who was previously on the commission. Mr. Jackson, with his life partner, Fran Walsh, owns a home north of Lake Pounui. (Mr. Jackson keeps part of his collection of World War I-era planes at the local airdrome.)

Around Martinborough too is some respectable wine country. At Ata Rangi, for instance (in Maori, it means “dawn sky”), Clive Paton makes pinot noir, sauvignon blanc and very crisp Chardonnays on land that was once thought useless.

Mostly, though, the land harbors sheep and cattle, long the staple of New Zealand’s economy. A few miles from Mr. Cameron’s new homestead is the Mathews farm, where a father and son graze sheep on rolling hills purchased in the mid-19th century. Raymond, the son, said he applauds Mr. Cameron’s arrival in the Wairarapa, which can use the work he is already bringing to contractors and handymen who have been fixing up a four-bedroom home amid a stand of black beech above Lake Pounui.

But Charles Mathews has reservations. Mr. Cameron, he said, overpaid for land that had been on the market since 2004. “I just hope it doesn’t affect all of our rates,” he said.

Ms. Staples hopes Mr. Cameron will ultimately engage with the locals, something he promised in an interview he would do — potentially discussing, for instance, how to improve the quality of soil on his new land so that he can grow crops. But the “I’m the king of the world!” director (his words on winning the best director Oscar for “Titanic” in 1998) also does not seem overly concerned with pleasing everybody. Asked if he might reopen that wedding hall, Mr. Cameron paused a bit, then said, “That’s going to be my workshop.” IN THE OCEANFRONT HILLS and cliffs surrounding Pounui, Ms. Staples said, are hundreds of unmarked Maori archaeological sites, including at least one that appears to predate a traditional timeline that traces Maori settlement to the 14th century.

The hidden presence of a native culture is one more echo of Pandora, of course.

But it was ultimately New Zealand’s contemporary film culture that persuaded Mr. Cameron to shift his work life, in stages, toward the Southern Hemisphere. New Zealand film crews, he said, have a freshness and flexibility he no longer finds in the United States. “They aren’t the sort of third-generation people you find working on soundstages in a very jaded Los Angeles,” he contended.

Ask New Zealanders who worked on “Avatar” about Mr. Cameron and their eyes tend to grow big. “You have to understand that we don’t have much experience outside of Peter, who is soft-spoken and gentle,” said one senior prop technician, who asked for anonymity because he hopes to get a job on the “Avatar” sequels. “Jim Cameron sometimes shouted at us, and our instinct was to take it personally.”

The difference between the two cinema titans is highlighted by what several longtime film workers in New Zealand referred to as “the two tea incidents.” Years ago the strong-willed Mr. Cameron, annoyed that his “Aliens” crew in England was taking a break, kicked over a tea cart — a tale that has followed him over time, in part because he personally retells it. In contrast, an anecdote about Mr. Jackson involves the time when there was confusion among new staffers over who was responsible for fetching him tea; multiple people kept arriving with steaming mugs, and, worried about offending anyone by speaking up, he spent the day politely accepting them.

The “Avatar” sequels, Mr. Cameron said, will almost certainly be shot in Mr. Jackson’s Wellington production studio, about 15 minutes by helicopter from Pounui. Visual effects will be completed at nearby Weta Digital, owned by Mr. Jackson and his partners, though motion-capture work on the “Avatar” sequels will still be done on a stage in California. “Avatar 2” will not be ready until 2015 or later, at least a year past the 2014 date Fox executives once had in mind.

Mr. Jackson said he was thrilled by Mr. Cameron’s decision to put down roots in New Zealand. “Maybe I can go wander off on a beach somewhere now,” he said with a smile, an apparent reference to the pressure he feels to keep big movies moving through his Wellington studio and effects operation. Mr. Jackson, while notably trying to steer clear of the brouhaha over Mr. Cameron’s land purchase, said he sees Mr. Cameron as a type of kindred spirit, someone, at long last, who was equally fascinated with pushing the technological limits on film.

“I want to help in any way I can,” Mr. Cameron said, while also talking of emulating Mr. Jackson, perhaps by building new facilities farther north, in Auckland. But Mr. Cameron, an outsider still, is careful not to challenge.

“I’m not there to compete with Peter,” he said.

FOR NOW MR. CAMERON remains based at his home near Santa Barbara, Calif., where he is at work on scripts for the “Avatar” sequels. In the American fall, when spring comes to New Zealand, he said he plans to decamp for Pounui, to continue writing and to let his family acclimate to a place that he said will eventually become home for at least half the year. Mr. Cameron, Canadian born, does not rule out a request for citizenship.

“I’ve felt an attachment to the place since 1994,” he explained. That year Mr. Cameron was marooned for weeks on the South Island while working out the tangled logistics of a trip to Antarctica. So he did a bit of touring that showed him a country that he found both familiar — full of associations to small-town Ontario, where he grew up — and wildly exotic, with glaciers, fjords and, yes, eels. “The people were polite, and they were decent,” he said.

He long wanted a home in New Zealand, but “it sometimes take me a long time to do the things I set out to do,” he said. In recent weeks he has continued to buy land in Pounui. His latest purchase more or less reassembles an original homestead owned by a family that was also named Cameron.

“Kismet,” Mr. Cameron called it.