First published on Feb 7, 1999.

KASHGAR is a town tangled up in two time zones. Nestled in the northwest of China, less than 200 miles from the borders of Afghanistan, Tajikistan, Pakistan and Kyrgyzstan, the legendary Silk Road oasis is run by the Han Chinese, who follow the clock of their capital, two time zones away in Beijing. Meanwhile, the Uighurs, Turkic-speaking Muslims who make up more than 80 percent of Kashgar's population, live according to the local clock, two hours earlier than Beijing's. This disparity makes Kashgar a confusing town to navigate -- and it made the task of tracking down Abdurahim Heet, one of the most important contemporary Uighur composers and musicians, extremely difficult.

Like Kashgar, Mr. Heet leads a double life. On one hand, he is famous in the region for his performances of traditional Uighur (pronounced WE-goor) poetry and music. These are sung in a deep, resonant, nasal voice and accompanied by the dutar, a two-stringed lute. The music is available as cassettes manufactured and distributed by the Chinese Government.

On the other hand, there are the privately manufactured cassettes. These contain Mr. Heet's original compositions, pieces like ''Stubborn Guest,'' an old man's plea to a lodger who has overstayed his welcome -- and a thinly disguised analogy for China's presence in the surrounding Xinjiang region, which was made a province of China in 1884. Traditionally, Uighur music deals with love, morality and criticisms of misconduct. But Mr. Heet -- known as the ''Rooster of Xinjiang'' because of his voice -- is the first Uighur musician to write about life under Chinese rule. As a result, he has to pay extra money to the private manufacturers of his cassettes to compensate them for the risk they are taking. He distributes these tapes for free.

A master of folk tradition with a fire for protest and poetry, he has become a local Bob Dylan, spurring many musicians to follow in his footsteps (and in at least one case to get arrested for a politically charged performance). Songs like ''Stubborn Guest'' and ''Silk,'' a paean to Uighur culture, have become anthems and sources of pride in Kashgar, where donkey carts are still the main mode of transportation.

The search for Mr. Heet began in Kashgar's busy Sunday market, where the stalls selling local cassettes had his three-tape series of traditional tunes, ''Regret,'' on prominent display. There Abdul Ghenee, a young Uighur who had discarded the traditional skullcap in favor of a baseball cap worn backwards, promised he could help track the composer down.Continue reading the main story''We have a saying,'' he said, rubbing his bandaged eye, a result of a fight with a Chinese man who had insulted a Uighur woman. ''When a Uighur child can walk, he can dance. When a Uighur child can speak, he or she can sing.''

The next stop was an open storefront on a dirt road. The shop belonged to the Emin family, which has been making and selling instruments there for five generations. The store was a reminder of Kashgar's duality. On the outside was a gold-covered plaque designating the shop's proprietor, Muhammat Emin, as a model member of the local Communist league. But inside, traces of modern Kashgar disappeared. The walls were lined with elaborately decorated hushtars, a violin-like instrument that had disappeared from Uighur music until it was discovered during an excavation in the nearby Taklaman desert some 50 years ago. The snakeskin heads of rewap lutes and dop drums were also scattered around the dusty room. Mr. Emin picked and pounded melodies and rhythms on each, explaining the Uighur oral tradition. There is no notation in Uighur music, which is perhaps a good thing, since what little was written about the music was burned along with as many instruments as could be gathered during the Cultural Revolution.

''Ten years ago, modern music was very popular,'' Mr. Emin said. ''But these days folk music has the most important place in Uighur society. I think it's because during the Cultural Revolution people didn't have the freedom to choose what they listened to, and many famous musicians were killed.''
Mr. Emin gave Mr. Ghenee the phone number of Mr. Heet's sister, a music teacher, explaining that Mr. Heet does not have a phone. At Mr. Heet's sister's house, her nephew, Marat, wearing a T-shirt emblazoned with the logo of the Western heavy-metal band Kreator, offered to lead us to the small house where the composer lives with his parents.

Mr. Heet was dressed in jeans, a neatly pressed white button-down shirt and a dapper mustache. A finely handled Uighur dagger hung from a leather sheath hooked to one of his belt loops. He sat on an elevated, bright red carpet in an otherwise empty room and had his family bring out flat bread, melon, tea and a bowl for hand-washing. He then leaned over and whispered something to Mr. Ghenee who explained, embarrassed, that Mr. Heet had never spent time with an American before.

FOR the next hour, Mr. Heet (with Mr. Ghenee serving as translator) explained the history of the music, the dozens of marathon four-hour concerts he performs annually and the book he was completing on classical Uighur music, the first of its kind. ''Music is one of the most important parts of Uighur culture,'' he said. ''People here can wear American T-shirts, but their hearts stay the same. The music, because it's such a symbol of the heart, changes slowly.''

Nonetheless, Mr. Heet has been changing the music. Influenced by Persian, Arabic and Turkish music, Uighur songs are as jubilant as they are complex, soaring and dipping along the Arabic scale known as the maqam and helping to give the Xinjiang region the nickname ''the land of song and dance.'' Generally thought to have been brought to the area in the ninth century, Uighur music wound up influencing Chinese court music when it became a favorite among Tang emperors.

One of the highlights of Mr. Heet's latest recording and first CD, ''Inheritance,'' is a song called ''Rooster,'' a story about a rooster awaking his people from darkness to welcome a new dawn.

''The Government hasn't said anything to me about the political songs yet,'' he said, ''so I don't know if I have a problem.''

That night, Mr. Heet brought us to a local teahouse, where he sat in the back room, door shut to prevent the sound of the restaurant's one-man synthesizer band from leaking in. After dinner, Mr. Heet found a dutar in the restaurant. It was warped and out of tune. But when his fingers started sliding and twiddling with heavy-metal speed up and down the long neck -- nearly twice the size of a guitar's -- the instrument's defects seemed to disappear. Wailed rooster-voiced lyrics of love reverberated off the walls, the strings crackled brightly beneath his calloused fingers, uptempo melodies flowed out of the door. Mr. Heet went on for minutes, or hours; it was hard to tell. For a moment, Kashgar was one, keeping time to a single clock, the dutar.