HONG KONG — Nam Kee Noodles is a typical Hong Kong eatery: functional, popular and busy. A dozen plastic-topped tables offer room for about 40 patrons, who line up outside at lunchtime to consume spicy noodle soup, dumplings and iced soy milk amid the clatter of plastic bowls and chopsticks.

In April, however, the little restaurant in the heart of Causeway Bay, one of Hong Kong’s busiest shopping districts, nearly had to shut down after the landlord tripled what was an already expensive rent.

“We were paying around 200,000 dollars a month,” said Au Kei-Hong, the shop’s manager, referring to an amount in Hong Kong dollars equivalent to about $25,800. “But the landlord then increased it to 600,000. It was too expensive. We cannot afford that.”

After frantic negotiations, Mr. Au agreed to a less dramatic — though still steep — increase that has allowed him to stay put for another year.

Others have not been so lucky. Soaring rents have forced at least three other small businesses on the same Causeway Bay street to move or close down in the past few months, and similar tales of woe are commonplace among small businesses in other prime areas in the bustling and crowded city.

Rapid growth and sweeping economic changes have pushed up retail rents in many of Asia’s growing metropolises in recent years. But nowhere have they reached the stratospheric heights that they have in Hong Kong, a banking, logistics and trading hub that is seen by many companies as a testing ground and launching pad for the vastly larger mainland Chinese market.

Hong Kong’s residential property prices have come off their recent highs mainly because of government measures intended to cool demand — but those measures do not affect retail rents.

“It’s a normal phenomenon for small retailers to be squeezed out by high rents. It happens everywhere,” said Joe Lin, executive director of retail services at the real estate services firm CBRE in Hong Kong. “But in Hong Kong, the pressures have become very severe in the last two to three years — it’s very unhealthy. Luxury and jewelry now dominate 90 percent of the space in prime locations. The whole trade mix in some of these areas has changed.”

Causeway Bay, where Nam Kee Noodles is struggling to survive among high-end clothing and watch retailers, commands the most expensive retail rents in the world: an average of 1,950 dollars per square foot per month, according to an update on first-quarter figures for this year from Cushman & Wakefield, a real estate consulting firm.

Two other Hong Kong neighborhoods, Tsim Sha Tsui and Central, also rank among the top five most expensive locations in the world — along with Fifth Avenue and Times Square in New York — easily topping luxury shopping destinations like the Champs-Élysées in Paris and the Ginza in Tokyo.

That has squeezed out many of the colorful mom and pop stores — hardware shops, fruit stalls, herbal medicine vendors, restaurants — that form a large part of Hong Kong’s business ecosystem, changing the face of many neighborhoods in the process.

A few minutes’ walk from Central, which is home to Hong Kong’s financial district, Ngau Kee Food Café, which for many years sold traditional Cantonese dishes to diners perched on rickety stools, shut down in April after the landlord raised the rent from 49,000 dollars to 120,000 dollars per month.

The restaurant’s owner, Mak Ping-Kuen, is hoping to open up again in another part of town but has struggled to find a new site.

“I hope we can reopen as soon as possible. My customers are getting impatient,” he said.

Nearby, two popular bars in the SoHo district have closed in the past few months, again because the owners could not afford big rent increases.

And Tsui Yuen Desserts, which sold delicacies like ginger-flavored milk custard and sweet black sesame soup for less than 20 dollars a bowl, had to relocate from Causeway Bay to Wan Chai, a neighborhood more geared to nightlife than to hungry tourists.

“Sure, we have some old customers who still come for a bowl of dessert, but it’s a lot quieter now,” said Tsui Yuen’s manager, Mr. Ho, who would give only his last name. “We want to go back to Causeway Bay, but we can’t. Even a small little shop would cost us 200,000 dollars a month. Going back would bankrupt us.”

In their place have come luxury-goods retailers and jewelry and cosmetics shops, which have flocked en masse into Hong Kong in recent years in a bid to cater to a flood of shoppers from neighboring mainland China.

The British retailer Topshop, for example, opened a large store in Central — its first in greater China — in early June, while Apple and the Japanese retailer Uniqlo opened huge outlets just around the corner from Nam Kee Noodles in the past few months.

Taxes on high-end goods are far lower in Hong Kong than in mainland China, so it is those goods in particular that are popular with mainland shoppers. At the same time, the number of visitors from the mainland has soared since travel restrictions for them were loosened in 2003 to help Hong Kong weather the economic blow dealt by an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, or SARS, that year. In 2002, 6.8 million mainlanders visited Hong Kong. Last year, the number was 35 million.

The money spent by those visitors has helped drive economic growth in Hong Kong and now makes up a sizable chunk of the economy and the local job market.

Chinese visitors spent the equivalent of almost $23 billion in Hong Kong in 2012 — equal to about 9 percent of gross domestic product — and that figure, said Donna Kwok, an economist at HSBC in Hong Kong, is likely to rise to about $60 billion by 2015.

On the flip side, Hong Kong’s resulting attractiveness to companies that want to lure those visitors has helped drive up retail and office rents.

Shop rents in Causeway Bay, for example, have risen about 80 percent since mid-2010, and have more than doubled since 2007, according to Cushman & Wakefield.

Moreover, no relief is in sight any time soon, although the mainland Chinese economy is cooling, analysts believe.

“China’s economy may be slowing, but this does not mean that demand is going to evaporate,” Ms. Kwok said. “Chinese shoppers will keep coming to Hong Kong.”

And as long as that is the case, Mr. Lin of CBRE said, retailers will want to beef up their presence in the city, ensuring that shop rents will stay high.

“Ten or 20 percent increases over the years were reasonable. But a 100 percent increase — we can’t pay that,” added Mr. Ho of Tsui Yuen Desserts. “How many bowls would we have to sell just to cover the rent?”