BEIJING — To celebrate Mother’s Day, Ai Weiwei, the Chinese artist and political malcontent, went to dine last Sunday at a restaurant on a famous eating strip in Beijing called Ghost Street.

When I met with him one morning at his studio this week, Mr. Ai said he had never eaten on Ghost Street before. It is a place of small restaurants with aggressive hawkers standing outside some of the shopfronts. Though humble, the restaurants draw big crowds to simple dishes that range from crayfish to hotpot to grilled chicken wings on a stick.

Rows of red lanterns hang from wires over the sidewalks, where people sit at outdoor tables in warm weather. The street is a couple blocks from my home in Beijing, and I have on occasion eaten there. The meals have not been memorable.

Early Sunday evening, Mr. Ai’s mother was driven over to a restaurant in a car. Mr. Ai and his younger brother had decided to walk. As they approached a popular block of Ghost Street, they saw a commotion ahead of them. On the ground were overturned tables. There were people shouting and throwing chairs and waving sticks, Mr. Ai said. He got out his cell phone and began recording the scene.

“I had arrived in the middle of the fight,” he said later. “I saw someone lying on the ground with blood.”

The video, which spread quickly on the Internet this week, shows a woman lying unmoving on the sidewalk, with blood flowing from some part of her body. A young woman in a pink blouse and jeans stands over her and screams. Next to them a huge street brawl is swirling, with men on one side of the fight throwing brick-like projectiles at another group of men. Police officers in blue shirts try meekly to hold back some of the enraged men, only to have the assailants ignore them and continue fighting.

Mr. Ai said the conflict appeared to be one between ethnic Tibetan street vendors and ethnic Han, the dominant group in China. Discussion on the Internet centered around whether some sort of ethnic tension had bubbled up. Tibetans in western regions talk about feeling under siege from Han rule, and a wave of self-immolations by Tibetans — nearly 120 since 2009 — have highlighted the frustration and fury felt by many of them.

The Tibetan vendors involved in the brawl appeared to be the kind who pop up in certain corners of Beijing selling objects they call religious antiques, but that are often of questionable value. Mr. Ai said he did not know why the fight had broken out.

One long block south of the strip, two people, one of them coincidentally an American friend of Mr. Ai, witnessed two separate fights around the same time. In one case, two men got off a motorbike and beat up another man on the street with short sticks. These outbursts of violence may well have been related to the brawl on Ghost Street.

This was not the first time Mr. Ai happened to stumble across violence in the streets and film it. In September 2012, during a wave of anti-Japan protests in China, Mr. Ai was standing next to the United States Embassy in Beijing when a sedan carrying Ambassador Gary F. Locke became surrounded by angry Chinese protesters. Some pelted the car with objects. The United States is often seen by Chinese as favoring Japan over China in foreign policy disputes.

Mr. Ai posted the video to the Internet, and it became a sensation. Mr. Ai is often seen walking around the embassy. There is a branch of Fatburger there. Unlike Ghost Street, it is a place that Mr. Ai frequents.