Fiyel Levent was born and raised in New York City. But her interest in Middle Eastern art and design is evident throughout her work, from small-scale pieces, like paper lanterns die-cut with motifs that call to mind Persian textiles, to larger architectural installations, like the concrete wine wall she designed for a house in Bridgehampton, N.Y., which suggests an abstract version of the sort of ornamentation you might see in Islamic architecture.

It’s a longstanding interest informed by her background (Ms. Levent, 33, is of Tatar descent) and nurtured as an architecture student at Cooper Union, where she studied the fountain infrastructure of Istanbul. And it continued to grow in the years that followed, when she and her husband, Basar Girit, a partner in the design firm Situ Studio, traveled first to Andalusia, Spain, to document the architecture there, and then traced the architecture along the Northern Silk Road, from Uzbekistan to China.

“The aesthetic qualities of this type of architecture can be easily translated to modern technology, because the patterns are geometric and repetitive,” she said, explaining the influence on her own design.

“All my work has some kind of pattern on it,” she said. “I like to play with light and pattern, and layer them to different effect.”

In search of furnishings that borrow from the vernacular of the Middle East in a similar way, Ms. Levent began at the Mondo Collection in the Flatiron district, where the work of Nada Debs, a Lebanese designer, caught her eye.

“She’s a Middle Eastern designer interpreting her cultural past through new material and processes,” said Ms. Levent, who singled out a “very contemporary” Arabian Nights mirror that cleverly replaced the traditional mother-of-pearl inlay with resin and brass.

She also praised Ms. Debs’s Arabesque dining chair, which had a white lacquer finish that looked “like it could be made of carved marble,” she said, “and casts a different light from every angle.”

Tom Dixon’s Etch light, at Property in SoHo, also channeled a Middle East aesthetic with “a play of shade and light and reflection, of throwing patterns on a wall,” she said. “But this is done in a very modern way, more abstract and westernized.”

Ms. Levent also picked out several ottomans, which are “very much a part of nomadic traditions,” she said. “In Middle East culture, furniture often does double duty, so an ottoman could also be used as a table, or for seating.”

And the one she found on the Anthropologie Web site, a 79-inch-wide Saraband ottoman upholstered in an old dhurrie carpet, was even more versatile: it was nearly big enough to serve as a bed.

“The shape is modern, but the look is bohemian,” she said. “And it looks supercomfortable. You just want to lie on it and take a nap.” RIMA SUQI