BEIJING — Thousands of Chinese students took to the streets in Beijing 100 years ago Saturday, in a famous uprising against Western colonialism that still resonates today.

The protest became known as the May 4 Movement, a pivotal moment in Chinese history that the national leader, Xi Jinping, this week commemorated by praising patriotism and urging Chinese youth to “obey the party and follow the party.”

Here is why the movement matters, and why both supporters and critics of the Communist Party claim inspiration from it.

[Read about how Mr. Xi hailed the historic revolt but warned students not to get any ideasnot to get any ideas.]

What happened on May 4, 1919?

China had sided with the Allies in the First World War, and many Chinese expected that negotiators in the postwar peace talks would agree to hand back colonial territory in Shandong, an eastern Chinese province, that Japan had seized from Germany near the start of the war. Instead, the Western powers let Japan keep the territory.

That decision ignited fury among Chinese students, who saw it as a betrayal by Western nations and by China’s leaders, whom they accused of bowing to Japan. Anger spread in universities and colleges across Beijing, and on May 4, 1919, students from 13 campuses in the capital came together in protest. About 3,000 students joined the demonstration near Tiananmen, the “Gate of Heavenly Peace.”

The students marched off to present their demands to Western diplomatic legations nearby. Protesters moved on to the home of Cao Rulin, one of the ministers they accused of acceding to Japan’s demands, and some ransacked and burned it.

Some protesters were arrested. But the upsurge in nationalism spread to other cities in China, inspiring strikes and boycotts. The unrest forced the government in Beijing to release arrested students, and Chinese negotiators in Paris refused to sign the peace treaty. “May 4” entered history as a watershed for China.

Why does the Communist Party celebrate May 4?

China’s ruling Communist Party is usually quick to squelch protests, so it might seem unusual for it to mark the anniversary of a student demonstration. But the 1919 protest is different and distant enough that Chinese leaders have made it part of their cycle of significant anniversaries.

The May 4 protest became part of the party’s founding story. After Western powers ignored China’s pleas in 1919, more students and scholars looked to Russia’s Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 as a promising path toward national renewal. Some embraced Marxism and helped to found China’s Communist Party in 1921, and May 4 has entered the party’s iconography, celebrated on the Monument to the People’s Heroes that stands on Tiananmen Square.

Since Mr. Xi became chairman of the party in 2012, he has promoted a nationalist vision of making China a more prosperous and powerful country and restoring it to its ancient glory. The party has cast itself as the rightful heir to the patriotic legacy of May 4 as one way to strengthen its legitimacy.

Why are some critics of the party also inspired by May 4?

There are other ways of remembering May 4 that stray beyond the party’s script. Successive generations of student protesters and dissenting intellectuals have also claimed inspiration from the May 4 era, including the students who occupied Tiananmen Square in June of 1989 to demand cleaner, more accountable government.

Back in 1919, commentators linked the protests with the New Culture Movement, the name they gave to a flux of ideas that had spread in Chinese universities, newspapers and literary circles. Such ideas included anarchism, socialism, feminism, artistic experimentation and reforming written Chinese, said Elisabeth Forster, a lecturer in modern Chinese history at the University of Southampton who has written about the May 4 period and its myths. This iconoclastic spirit was summed up at the time in a slogan calling for “Mr. Science and Mr. Democracy.”

The idea of science “then stood for ‘modernity’, the ‘West’ and a generally distanced and iconoclastic way of approaching Chinese tradition,” Ms. Forster said. “1919 really was a year that changed China.”

So the New Culture and May 4 movements have both been evoked by Chinese scholars and students as lodestars for intellectual independence and enlightenment.

“May 4 cannot be put to rest because the question is still screaming out: can you have science, technology and wealth without democracy?” said Vera Schwarcz, a professor of Chinese history at Wesleyan University.