At first, I thought the faded pink pillow on the crumbling stone floor of the watchtower was a remnant of a previous camping trip.

“Are we coming back here to sleep?” I asked our guide, Joe Zhang, at the beginning of a two-day hike last July along the Great Wall of China, which I was making with my husband, Robb Kendrick, a photographer, and two teenage sons.

Joe shook his head and guessed that the pillow belonged to a local farmer passing through. When I asked where we were going to camp, he pointed out the window to the snaking wall that sliced through lush Panlong (Coiling Dragon) Mountain, part of the Yanshan Range, which stretches across northern Hebei province.

“If we camp tonight, we'll set up tents inside a watchtower that way,” he said. “If we camp.”

That “if,” which he felt compelled to repeat, bothered me. My family had signed up with the tour operator Great Wall Adventure Club to hike this remote part of the Great Wall because I loved the idea of actually sleeping on the wall. I envisioned drifting off to the same sounds and scents that a Mongol-fighting soldier would have experienced centuries ago. I imagined watching the sun burst over peaks crowned by ancient crenelated watchtowers in the morning.

Plenty of tour operators take visitors on half-day tours from Beijing to the Badaling or Mutianyu sections of the Great Wall, which are 64.4 to 80.5 kilometers north of the capital; with travel time from Beijing, that leaves about two hours on the wall. But I wanted to escape the crowds and get a wilder, deeper experience. On its website, the Dallas-based Great Wall Adventure Club guaranteed we'd camp on the wall, but in subsequent communications, I learned the guarantee held as long as the weather was good. As we prepared for our outing, I tried not to think of the forecast I'd heard for our first day: chance of thunderstorms, 80 percent.

At 8 that morning, Joe — a lively young man who'd studied Great Wall history in college and on his own — and a driver picked us up in a van at our rented Beijing apartment. After getting through snarls of city traffic, we made our way about 144.8 kilometers northeast, much of it on a new highway that wove through increasingly mountainous terrain, arriving in the village of Gubeikou about 10 a.m. When the driver dropped us off at a ticket booth where Joe bought our entrance permits, we took only what we needed that day — water, sunscreen, cameras — and Joe carried our lunch. Our overnight bags stayed in the van with the driver, who would meet us at the end of our day's 9.7-kilometer hike in the town of Jinshanling.

The Great Wall — 8,851 kilometers by some counts, longer by others — is not one wall but many that were built starting in ancient times and were consolidated and reinforced during the Ming dynasty (1368-1644). The purpose: keeping northern raiders from swooping down into the heart of China. The stretch of wall between Gubeikou and Jinshanling, which we hiked on the first day, is considered a prime example of Ming dynasty construction, built from 1568 through 1583 on top of a 1,000-year-old relic of a wall from the Northern Qi dynasty (550-577). Because the Gubeikou area was a strategic passage to Beijing, the more than 40 watchtowers we passed are closely spaced, and the wall was especially strong and well reinforced, constructed of brick up its 7-meter height.

Early in the hike, Joe pointed out a “character brick,” where the stamp of the maker is still visible after almost half a millennium.

“You couldn't see that at Badaling,” Joe said, referring to the most visited and photographed part of the wall closer to Beijing.

The throngs of tourists are so thick, he said, that you feel like a “dumpling in a pot.” He also said that Badaling was heavily restored and not always authentically, with part of renovations dating back to the 1950s. The wall there is so modernized that much of it has metal handrails.

The wall around Gubeikou has been untouched (except for spot repairs on unsafe areas), and part of the thrill is to see this man-made section surviving the war that nature has been waging against it for hundreds of years. Weeds have taken over much of what was once a 4-meter-wide surface, with only a narrow path in places formed by hikers before us. While many watchtowers were merely ghostly shells with window holes, some were surprisingly intact.

In a watchtower, over a simple picnic lunch of bread, bananas, sausage and a Chinese version of Lay's potato chips, Joe told us we were coming to a forbidden section: a part of the wall we couldn't walk on because it was still used today as the northern boundary of an army compound.

We hiked the next 90 minutes in the brush below the wall to avoid it — passing by farmers' cornfields, pear trees and irrigation canals, by old cottages surrounded by bluebells and tiger lilies. Then we spent the rest of the day back on top, not getting down again until we came to Jinshanling, which means Gold Mountain Ridge, having seen only two other groups of hikers the entire day.

If the weather had been good, our driver would have taken us back to the area around Gubeikou to camp and then returned us to the same spot in the morning to continue on. But I noticed clouds moving in while we walked down into Jinshanling, a farming area that has fully embraced Great Wall tourism.

Finally the word came down: No.

“You don't want to be in a watchtower during a thunderstorm,” Joe said.

I maintained that we would be sheltered from the rain and I didn't mind getting wet in any case, but Joe was firm. I felt the company might be copping out. Maybe some attempt at permission had been unsuccessful or setting up tents would have been too much of a headache.

I sulked while we drove to the nearby town of Ba Ke Shi Ying to spend the night at a farmer's house. This was a smart farmer who had built a strip of rooms on his property (and called it Kang Da Homestay) to take advantage of the newly prosperous Beijingers flocking there on weekends as a refuge from the city.

Joe estimated that a farmer could earn 100,000 renminbi ($16,700 at 6 renminbi to the dollar) a year renting rooms, on top of the 10,000 renminbi he might make farming.

By the morning, the rain was gone, replaced by humidity and fog. After a short drive to Jinshanling, we walked back up to the wall. The wall became more deteriorated as we approached what's known as Second Valley — our adventure's ending point.

Back on the wall that morning, we marveled at the eerie splendor the fog brought to the ruins. Clouds swallowed the wall at the top of ridges. At one watchtower, Joe told us a legend of Hei Gu (Black Girl), who came with her father, a Ming dynasty general, to take care of him as he worked.

“One day this tower was hit by lightning, and she died in the fire trying to save it.”

I half-suspected Joe's story was a justification of the decision not to camp until I noticed a plaque that confirmed the legend's details. I then saw another sign that warned people to get off the wall during thunderstorms. The wall, it said, was the highest point on the ridges and, as such, was especially vulnerable to lightning strikes.

Not camping on the wall, I thought — that was the best idea of the whole trip.