The visit of President Xi Jinping of China to Seoul last week underscored how Beijing is intent on warmer ties with South Korea, already  a strong economic partner. During the visit, Mr. Xi and President Park Geun-hye of South Korea agreed on the need to keep North Korea’s nuclear ambitions in check but papered over substantial differences on how to reach that goal. Perhaps more important, the visit reflected tensions among Seoul and Tokyo, the United States’ key allies in the region, as China tries to exploit South Korean wariness of Japan stemming from Japan’s colonial dominance of the Korean peninsula in the early 20th century.John Delury, an assistant professor of Chinese and East Asian Studies at Yonsei University in Seoul, watches the rapidly shifting strategic and economic landscape in Northeast Asia. From his perch as associate director of the Center on U.S.-China Relations at the Asia Society in New York from 2007 to 2010 he participated in projects on North Korea, including the policy paper “North Korea Inside Out: The Case of Economic Engagement.”

Mr. Delury holds a Ph.D from Yale University. His book “Wealth and Power: China’s Long March to the Twenty-First Century” (Random House, 2013), co-authored with Orville Schell, examines the lives of 11 influential Chinese whose lives shaped modern China. During his Ph.D studies at Yale, Mr. Delury spent several years at Chinese universities, and his horizons broadened to Korea after meeting his wife, Jeong-eun Park, a native of Seoul. He has visited Pyongyang four times, most recently last year with Eric E. Schmidt, chairman of Google.

Q. Could you detect any signs from the visit of President Xi to Seoul that he and President Park made any substantive progress on the North Korean question?

A. Despite all the hoopla surrounding Xi’s visit to South Korea, there was no sign of any breakthrough in solving the North Korean conundrum. The official statements were fairly anodyne — Presidents Xi and Park agreed on the “need of six-party talks,” as opposed to laying out concrete steps for how to get those talks restarted. Xi affirmed Park’s commitment to improving inter-Korean relations, but did not call on Kim Jong-un to do more. Xi repeated China’s standard goal of seeking denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, still not even daring to call it “North Korean denuclearization.” Foreign Minister Wang Yi, who accompanied Xi, has on numerous occasions over the past year issued a thinly veiled warning to Pyongyang that Beijing will not tolerate anyone “causing chaos on our doorstep,” but the visit to Seoul was noticeably absent of any such language.The symbolism of Xi alighting in Seoul and addressing his “old friend” Park was probably enough in and of itself to send a message to Kim. Perhaps a traditional idiom Xi used, that sometimes “a good neighbor is better than a distant cousin”, was an oblique reference to the fact that he is happier so far with his neighbors in the South than his communist cousins in the North. But still, we saw no evidence of Xi and Park developing a joint action plan for dealing with Pyongyang. One senses that North Korean denuclearization was covered relatively swiftly in their discussions, and was not the focal point of the summit.

There was, at least, one ironic twist to the North Korean denuclearization issue, which was the opportunity to hear China criticizing someone else for being too soft on sanctions enforcement. Responding to Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s fresh announcement that Japan would start selectively lifting sanctions in return for North Korea reopening the investigation into the fate of Japanese citizens abducted by North Korean agents in the 1970s and 1980s, Xi and Park warned against “mishandling” sanctions.

Q. Do you think it is likely that Mr. Xi will make some gesture to North Korea in the coming period in order not to have Kim Jong-un too angry, and to make it appear that he is way out on a limb with South Korea?

A. Just prior to President Park’s initial state visit to Beijing last June, Xi received a high-level envoy from Kim Jong-un. This time around, although a relatively senior D.P.R.K. official did recently visit Beijing, the two sides made no public effort to dampen the symbolic blow of Xi’s visit to Seoul with an exchange of emissaries in advance. In the wake of Xi’s trip, however, China-North Korea relations are likely to lumber along, rather than go into some kind of free fall.

The key factor could be that Kim Jong-un has not been ready to visit Beijing — security concerns alone might prevent him from leaving the country. But more than that, the symbolism of running off to pay obeisance to Xi in Beijing would not play well domestically in North Korea, where there is resentment and anxiety over China’s preponderant economic and diplomatic influence.

Kim’s father, Kim Jong-il, did not visit China until six years after taking power after the death of his own father in 1994. It could well take Kim as long to make his maiden voyage.

Q. The history questions with Japan played quite a role in the summit meeting. Does South Korea feel that the United States ignores these questions, and allows Japan to “get away” with bad behavior? Should the United States do more diplomatically to lessen the tensions between its main but estranged Asian allies?

A. History is the third rail of northeast Asian politics, and from a South Korean perspective the problem is only getting worse with time. Ironically, President Park’s father and Prime Minister Abe’s grandfather were the key players in normalizing relations between their countries in 1965. It was highly controversial at the time and remains so to this day. When Park and Abe captured high office, there was reason to hope they could complete the work of their ancestors and achieve a second normalization. But instead, Abe is almost universally condemned in Korea for undermining the delicate post-war reconciliation, and Park refuses to hold a bilateral summit with him.

Naturally Seoul hopes Washington can intervene more forcefully to rein Abe in. However, Japan remains the Pentagon’s “aircraft carrier” in East Asia, and plays a central role in the United States’ effort to remain the dominant Pacific power. South Korea is part of that carrier group, to be sure, but not the flagship. So there is a sense here that security trumps history. American officials hold their noses when Abe takes a revisionist stance like visiting the Yasukuni Shrine, but don’t appear to put up much of a fight. On his recent visit to the region, for example, President Obama spoke eloquently about the need for Japan to honestly confront the legacy of wartime sexual slavery, but he gave these remarks in Seoul, rather than doing so while in Tokyo where they could have had real impact.

South Korea’s doubts that Japan’s leadership has fully renounced and repented for their decades of colonial rule in Korea is the fundamental constraint on closer trilateral security cooperation between the U.S. and its two key allies in East Asia. If the U.S. genuinely desires enhanced trilateral security cooperation, then it will have to take a more proactive role on the root issues of mistrust and misunderstanding that bedevil the South Korea-Japan relationship.

The blossoming ties between China and South Korea’s leaders underline this central role that historical understanding is playing in the region. Xi and Park have jointly unveiled new historical monuments to celebrate Korean patriots who fought against Japan in China, and on this visit to Seoul Xi suggested joint commemoration of the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II next year — or as Chinese and Koreans know it, the War of Anti-Japanese Resistance. If the United States were playing a more forceful role in challenging Abe on history, would the South Koreans be bonding so much with China on the issue?

Q. President Xi made a very strong speech to students at Seoul National University, stressing the commonality between South Korea and China, and of course using the anti-Japanese theme as a common bond. Do you think Mr. Xi succeeded in presenting China in a new way so that 10 years from now those students, who will be the young leaders of South Korea, will think less of the U.S., and more of China?

A. The central theme of Xi’s speech at Seoul National University was Sino-Korean friendship, rooted in thousands of years of a connected cultural heritage, and now being reclaimed despite the political differences of communist China and democratic South Korea. He invoked a common historical enemy — Japanese imperialism — not only in its early 20th century guise, but also by referencing the large-scale Japanese invasion of Korea in the 1590s, when China’s ruling Ming dynasty sent troops to come to Korea’s defense. Xi’s many classical allusions combined with patriotic language should resonate among younger Koreans, who are drawn to traditional culture while thoroughly modern when it comes to things like nationalism

Xi also worked hard in his speech to emphasize China’s benign intentions on the Korean Peninsula and globally. If he tried to give such an address in Hanoi or Manila the audience might jeer him off stage, but in Seoul, Xi’s polished image of a peaceful, cooperative, even humble China — a friendly neighbor critical to Korea’s economic and security future — works. “China wants to be South Korea’s friend,” Xi promised.

Younger South Koreans — most of my students at Yonsei University, for example — will not uncritically accept Xi’s rhetoric about friendship with China, but neither will they dismiss it out of hand. Xi and his wife project a genuine fondness for things Korean, as well as for Madame Park. The “Korean wave” is still going strong among the Chinese public — when Xi’s wife said her husband as a young man resembled heartthrob Kim Soo-hyun from the hit television drama, “My Love From the Stars,” the allusion should play well both in Korea and back home. If Xi can sustain this charm offensive for the decade he is likely to be in charge, Park’s comment that Xi’s visit marked a historic turning point in China-South Korea relations may prove correct after all.