A 27-year-old man pleaded guilty on Wednesday to killing his cousin’s wife and four young children while he was staying in the family’s home in Brooklyn.

The man, Mingdong Chen, trembled as he stood handcuffed before Justice Vincent M. Del Guidice in State Supreme Court. In admitting to the crimes, Mr. Chen, who is from China, pleaded guilty to three counts of second-degree murder and two counts of first-degree manslaughter. He was originally charged with five counts of first-degree murder.

“I only would have accepted this plea if never again under any circumstances could he be free in society,” said the judge, who set sentencing for Oct. 20 and announced that he planned to sentence Mr. Chen to 125 years in prison.

According to the Brooklyn district attorney, Kenneth P. Thompson, Mr. Chen used a meat cleaver to kill Qiao Zhen Li, 37, and her children, Linda Zhuo, 9, Amy Zhuo, 7, Kevin Zhuo, 5, and William Zhuo, 1, on Oct. 27, 2013.

Ms. Li had called her mother-in-law in China that day and told her that Mr. Chen was threatening the family with a knife, Mr. Thompson said in a news release announcing the guilty plea. The mother-in-law alerted relatives who lived nearby, and they rushed to the family’s apartment on 57th Street in the Sunset Park neighborhood. There, Mr. Thompson said, they found Mr. Chen splattered with blood and held him until the police arrived.

The only glimpse of a motive for the killings that Mr. Chen ever offered came after he was arrested, when, according to the police, he told detectives that “everyone seems to be doing better than him” since his arrival in the United States in 2004. He and his cousin, Yilin Zhuo, Ms. Li’s husband and the father of the four dead children, are among the thousands of immigrants from Fujian, a province in southeast China, who have come to New York in recent decades. Many of those immigrants have settled in Sunset Park.

Mr. Zhuo was in court and followed the proceedings with the aid of an interpreter. In the process, he heard Mark Hale, an assistant district attorney, explain to the judge why prosecutors had agreed to the plea.

“The burning question is why these things happen, but in the sum total of things it doesn’t matter,” Mr. Hale said. “It is a certainty that the goal of public safety will be accomplished. This man will be permanently removed from society, and it saves the family an ordeal of a trial.”

But a woman identified by Mr. Hale as Mr. Zhuo’s sister wanted one question answered.

“You don’t know why he did what he did?” she asked him through the interpreter.

The prosecutor shook his head.