BEIJING — Sparkling red stars and bloody tales of military sacrifice accompanied 200 million Chinese children into the new school year this week, with the Education Ministry requiring them to watch a television show extolling the spirit of the Communist Red Army as it escaped its enemies on the Long March.

“Be unrelenting!” was the message of the 90-minute event, “Flag of Our Ancestors,” broadcast on CCTV, the state broadcaster.

In a sign of how wide-ranging the government’s propaganda efforts are, the Education Ministry asked schools to instruct parents to ensure their children watched the show, at 8 p.m. on Thursday, the first day of classes. Some asked parents to send photographs as proof that their children had complied.

Education departments across the country also announced a broader campaign to propagate the “Long March spirit,” 80 years after the end of the military trek that is a founding narrative of the Communist state. Educators have been exhorted to give speeches, assign homework and spread the word on social media like Weibo and WeChat. Model essays for children to crib were already circulating online on Friday.

During the program on Thursday night, a song by the popular boy band TFBoys set an upbeat tone before the action turned to the main message: the stories of personal and military sacrifice that the Communist Party wants children to emulate. Struggle and patriotism were how to advance the nation, the theme went, with an emphasis on scientific and technological achievements.

Veterans and the adult children of Red Army generals took the stage in red shirts or military uniforms to relate grisly stories of the Long March, which began in 1934 and ended two years later, as they retreated from the encircling Nationalist forces of Chiang Kai-shek in the south and headed north to Yan’an, the base from which they would seize control of the country in 1949.

A son of He Bingyan, the “one-armed general,” told how his father’s arm was cut off after an injury in a 2-hour-and-15-minute operation conducted without anesthesia and using ordinary work tools.

Do not be afraid of suffering, he and the M.C. urged the open-mouthed and tearful children, who applauded enthusiastically.

The daughter of another general, He Long, recounted how she had joined the march when she was just 18 days old, and how she was carried, then accidentally dropped, by her father as he fought, and later rescued by stragglers.

The message to China’s youth, who increasingly are the product of comfortably middle-class families, and are often overweight, was: “Don’t get soft.”

“The purpose is still to brainwash,” Zhang Lifan, an independent historian in Beijing, said in a telephone interview on Friday.

Mr. Zhang said he found the focus on the Long March as a foundational symbol of China’s rise jarring, given that the Red Army was in retreat at the time.

“They’ve made the story of fleeing after losing into a sort of spirit,” he said. “Actually, there was no grand plan when the Long March started.”

And he found the message to the children of China crudely propagandistic. “Follow the Communist Party, and you will ultimately embrace victory,” as he put it.

During the politics and drama of the program, there was also a little fun: Several children were brought onstage to participate in a mock Battle of Luding Bridge, a critical episode in the Long March, in which mattresses were laid on a “chain bridge” strung over a layer of balloons representing the Dadu River below.

Since 1949, Chinese schools have sustained a diet heavy in patriotism and Communist Party propaganda. But the annual back-to-school show, which began in 2008, has moved more sharply in that direction with the ideological tightening under President Xi Jinping, as he has cracked down on corruption and freethinkers alike and deployed the language and symbolism of a purist form of Communism to unify the country.