Should Apple Watch, the latest smartwatch to hit the streets, be as much a part of your travels as your passport and toothbrush?

The Internet is awash in reviews for technophiles but not travelers. And so I donned a stainless steel model and roamed Manhattan, testing apps and visiting hotels, landmarks and restaurants to glean how useful the watch may be for frequent fliers and road warriors. (I’ll be writing about other smartwatches in the coming weeks.)

Often, I was charmed. When I raised my wrist and said sotto voce into the watch, “Hey Siri, is there a public bathroom nearby?” up popped a polite note: “I don’t see any public toilets. Sorry about that.” When I ordered an Egg McMuffin at a McDonald’s, I never reached for my wallet. Rather, I paid instantly by double-clicking the side button on Apple Watch (bringing up an image of my credit card), then holding it to a reader by the cash register. Glad I wasn’t in Barneys.

Occasionally, I was baffled. Like when I was trying to use the Uber app, which was seemingly frozen — until it wasn’t. Suddenly it was ordering me car after car in what seemed like a digital-age version of the “I Love Lucy” candy factory episode. (Frantically tapping the watch face, I was ultimately able to cancel the vehicles.)

Like its competitors, Apple Watch ($349 for a silver aluminum Watch Sport model to $17,000 for an 18-karat yellow or rose gold Watch Edition model) mitigates a modern travel anxiety: fear of setting down your smartphone — in a cab, on a cafe table, in an airplane seat pocket — and kissing it goodbye. Your iPhone can remain in your bag or pocket while your Apple Watch hugs your wrist, subtly zapping it when a text message arrives, or flashing an alert when you pay for museum admission with your credit card (handy for budget trackers). It’s one less thing to hold (and drop) when you’re laden with luggage and trying to unearth a hotel confirmation number, or message the person picking you up at the airport.

Setting up the watch, which you can order online for shipping in June, is easy if you’re familiar with Apple products. It took me about six minutes to get it going, and even less time to load a dozen or so travel-related apps — including TripAdvisor, American Airlines, Expedia, Hotel Tonight, TripIt and OpenTable — onto my iPhone, which I paired with the watch using Bluetooth technology. For the uninitiated: You use your iPhone to add and set up the watch’s apps, including Apple Pay (the contactless payment technology).

In general, your iPhone (which must be an iPhone 5 or higher) has to be within about 30 feet of your watch for it to be fully functional. Also, to complete certain tasks (mainly to answer the kinds of questions for which you would search the Internet), you must transfer them to the iPhone, a process known as a “handoff.” For example, when I asked Siri when the Museum of Modern Art opened, she found the answer, but for me to see it there had to be a handoff. So I pulled out my iPhone where, by swiping on an icon on the home screen, I could read the museum’s hours.

Not ideal, as technology writers have noted. But that aside, you can use the watch to perform all sorts of tasks without ever reaching for your iPhone; you can dictate text messages, answer phone calls, see emails and calendar alerts, pay for dinner, possibly open your hotel room door. If you’re already an Apple customer, it’s fairly intuitive. I figured out how to use many of the watch’s travel features without the online instructions. (The main thing to learn, which I did look up, is that some actions require the same gesture you would use with any touch screen, while others require pressing down on the watch face.)

Among Apple Watch’s most useful tools for travelers is Siri, the virtual assistant that can feel extraneous on iPhones. It’s startlingly accurate when it comes to taking dictation (much more so than on my iPhone) and feels like a natural feature for a device that lives on your wrist. “Hey, Siri,” I said, raising an arm to my face. In return I received a vibration: Siri was ready to take orders. “I want to write a text,” I continued. A message appeared: “Who would you like to text?” So begins a swift way for anyone rushing to, say, an airport shuttle, to send an “I’ve landed; be there by 9” text without having to fish out a phone, open the messages app and type (Apple Watch is all about talking, not typing).

Siri was particularly inspiring one midnight, when I asked her to find pizza joints near Times Square. She pulled up a list faster than I could say “garlic knots.” After I selected Ray’s Pizza (not an endorsement but a matter of geographical convenience), she produced a map. You can use Apple Watch’s digital crown (the knob on the side) to zoom in and out along your route, though reading a 1-inch-by-1-inch screen while walking is not easy.

Travel apps that help you discover local restaurants and activities, like AroundMe and Yelp, worked smoothly, though Siri was more effective at uncovering what I wanted. Not that she’s perfect. Now and then she ignored me. “Hey, Siri,” I would begin, very solicitous. No response. “Hey, Siri,” I would say again, this time slightly more crisp. Still nothing. “Hey. Siri,” I eventually hissed. She was most giving when I spoke in a slow, sultry tone. But I’ve since learned that you don’t have to cajole Siri into action. Simply press and hold the digital crown for the “What can I help you with?” message. Then speak your request.

Other popular travel apps such as TripIt, TripAdvisor and OpenTable also worked, though the Apple Watch versions are far more basic given the smaller screen. OpenTable, for example, merely displays your next restaurant reservation. You can’t book a new one or see other reservations down the road (not very helpful). The Uber app is similarly no frills. You can’t select whether you want an SUV or black car, for instance, the way you can on the smartphone version of the app. But, hey, you can request a car (or five), which is all you need on a rainy or late night.

I had less success with Starwood’s SPG app, which allows members of its loyalty program to check in and unlock their door at certain hotels using a mobile device. I was registered and cleared for keyless check-in at the W New York Times Square, only to be thwarted on arrival. The reservationist at the welcome desk couldn’t have been nicer as he tried to divine why the app said, “Your mobile key has been temporarily deactivated.” He theorized that there might be a problem with the hotel’s server. Whatever the cause, it wasn’t an Apple Watch hitch — the SPG app didn’t allow me to go keyless on my iPhone either. Instead I was given a plastic key card that on the front promised, in my case ironically: “My days as a key are numbered.”

The Apple Watch is fun, and frequent travelers who take time to familiarize themselves with it can streamline some of their routine behaviors on the road. Is it essential? No. Do I want one? Yes. Because I like being able to read email, text, pay for things, and find nearby garlic knots from my wrist rather than having my smartphone in hand at all times.

But I’ll probably wait for the next version (the watch I’m sporting is a loaner). That’s because there was one major letdown for this traveler: the Maps app, which offers both walking and driving directions. Since I was in Manhattan, I tried only walking directions. Sometimes the app couldn’t find an address. Other times I was told, “directions not available.” On several walks there were no vibrations, sounds or comprehensible shorthand directions between the starting point and my destination.

“Hey, Siri, I’m lost,” I said into Apple Watch one breezy spring afternoon.

She replied, as is her way, with a note: “You’re on 10 W 83rd Street.”

Close. But not quite. I tried again.

“You’re on 115 W 86th Street,” she wrote.

Nope. I asked once more.

“You’re on 147 W 87th Street.”

I wasn’t. “Hey, Siri,” I said. “You keep giving me the wrong location.”

She responded in her usual polite manner.

“You’re certainly entitled to that opinion, Stephanie.”