MELBOURNE, Australia — In the immediate aftermath of most Grand Slam championships, the winners spout the usual clichés, shed a few tears and thank everyone they ever met and some people they do not know. There must be a manual for such occasions: thank, cry, cliché, repeat.

Then there is Li Na and the acceptance speech that came after her Australian Open women’s singles title, which she captured Saturday, by defeating Dominika Cibulkova, 7-6 (3), 6-0. Her speech was basically the opposite of that.

To her agent, Max Eisenbud, Li said, “Make me rich.”

To her husband, Jiang Shan, she said thank you in the form of a roast. She appreciated his dedication as her hitting partner, Li said, and the way he fixed her drinks and fixed her rackets. She noted his fame in China for that role. She ended by reminding him he was “so lucky to find me.” She said this on international television.

Perhaps she had a point. In victory, Li collected her second Grand Slam singles trophy; raised her standing as the most accomplished Chinese tennis player; and closed the gap on the No. 2 ranking, held by Victoria Azarenka, to 11 points. She also collected 2.65 million Australian dollars in prize money, or roughly $2.31 million.

Mr. Li Na, hitting partner, perpetual punch line, sounded like a pretty sweet gig.

Li entered her news conference to a round of applause from reporters, who oddly toasted her with Champagne and offered a “massive congratulations” and asked her when she realized she was funny. An official carried in her shiny silver trophy, which he handled with gloves. Someone did mention her husband, and asked whether he ever took offense.

“If he say, ‘Enough,’ I think I would do worse,” she said.

Throughout the tournament, upsets had thrown the women’s draw into chaos. Down went Serena Williams, the favorite; Maria Sharapova, the top contender; and Azarenka, the two-time defending champion. Li played 13 sets before the final and won 12, and eventually she became the predicted winner; normally, a good sign, in this tournament, perhaps not.

Still, Li could not shake what happened in the 2013 final against Azarenka, in which Li twice tumbled to the ground and once her head hit the court. Li brought up those stumbles repeatedly. In 2013, as in 2011, she had won the first set, stood one set from the trophy and faltered. The falls added embarrassment to the defeats.

Six months later, Li nearly retired. That is her version of the story, anyway. She was on the way to Wimbledon, in a car with her coach, Carlos Rodriguez, and she floated the R-word. Rodriguez, the kind of mentor Li described as blunt, said, “O.K., let’s go home.”

That answer caught Li by surprise. She stayed. She played. In the third round, she clawed her way to a third-set victory over Klara Zakopalova. She made the quarterfinals.

No one mentioned retirement again.

Li’s final opponent this time, Cibulkova, stood 5 feet 3 inches, which would have tied her with two others for the title of shortest women’s Grand Slam champion. Naturally, her diminutive stature led to the usual nicknames. Some called Cibulkova the Energizer bunny. Others referred to her as “pocket rocket.”

Cibulkova arrived at their matchup having felled a series of favorites along the way. She defeated the No. 16 (Carla Suárez Navarro), No. 3 (Sharapova), No. 11 (Simona Halep) and No. 5 (Agnieszka Radwanska) seeds, in that order, to reach the final. Li, meanwhile, did not so much as take on a seeded player higher than 22nd, and in the third round, against Lucie Safarova, Li’s passive play not only angered Rodriguez but also left her facing a match point.

“I should send an email to Safarova,” Li said in her news conference.

On Saturday, that match point seemed as if it happened a few years ago, as Cibulkova ran into the one seed she could not bully from the baseline. She tried. She attacked Li’s forehand at every opportunity. She made Li work.

Li struggled in the first set, first with her first serve, then with her forehand. A 3-1 lead turned into a 4-3 deficit, and when Cibulkova fought off a set point down, 6-5, it seemed fair to wonder whether Li would then collapse. Instead, she managed to win the tiebreaker, despite 25 first-set errors and the fact that only half of her first serves landed in.

“I didn’t miss all the forehands,” she said, emphasis on “all.”

The second set took only slightly longer than a trip to the concession stand. Li found her rhythm, and as she landed shots with greater regularity, she took more chances. As she took more chances, she seized control.

“She was more relaxed, and she was going for her shots,” Cibulkova said. “She was just really, really playing well.”

Earlier in the week, Cibulkova playfully chided reporters for always asking when she will break into the top 10. Perhaps her run here will be something of a breakthrough.

For all the talk this Open of Roger Federer’s switch to a larger racket frame, Cibulkova also arrived here with a new stick. Hunter Hines, the director of marketing and product development at Dunlop, said Cibulkova tested her new racket in December and decided to make the switch.

The new frame, slightly heavier and slightly longer, and with about a 14 percent rounder racket head, played into Cibulkova’s strengths. It gave her more power and spin.

“I feel that way, yes,” Cibulkova said when asked if she could win future Grand Slam tournaments. “I feel like my game is there to challenge the biggest names, to beat them.”

Now, Li is a two-time Grand Slam winner, with this trophy and her triumph at the French Open in 2011. This will only bolster her value as a brand in the world’s most populated country, her status as an icon, her résumé for potential Hall of Fame consideration.

For now, she planned to return to China and see her family and celebrate the new year. She planned to train there, too, of course.

Someone asked what the Chinese characters on her shirt meant. The answer came back, and there was no punch line, only truth. It read: My heart has no limits.