SCARBOROUGH SHOAL, South China Sea — We could see the glistening turquoise waters in the distance, a haven where deep-sea waves soften and, fishermen say, the grouper and snapper could feed a village for eternity.

But standing guard at the mouth of Scarborough Shoal, was a 130-foot Chinese coast guard trawler. If we were going to get more than a glimpse of this speck of coral and rock — the latest potential flashpoint between China and the United States in the disputed South China Sea — we would have to be quick.

Captain Alex O. Tagapan, who usually takes tourists on sightseeing cruises, pointed our boat toward the entrance of the boomerang-shaped atoll and accelerated. Turning to a small statue he kept in the cabin of Santo Niño de Cebú, a patron saint of the Philippines known for miraculous powers, he said a prayer.

Within minutes, the Chinese had sprung to action, sending a speedboat painted with the coast guard’s red stripes racing toward us. “Get out! Get out!” a man on the boat wearing a bamboo hat and an orange vest shouted in English, waving his arms frantically.

Over the past two years, China has worked at breakneck pace to strenghthen its claim of sovereignty over the South China Sea, dredging sand from the ocean floor to turn scattered reefs and atolls into artificial islands despite protests from neighbors and from the United States.

Now, China is said to be considering plans to build Scarborough Shoal into an island too, an effort that would be its most ambitious and provocative yet. Doing so would give it an outpost on the eastern side of the sea, more than 400 miles from its mainland but just 120 miles from the Philippines.

That could bolster China’s claim to the sea, including oil exploration and fishing rights, and substantially extend its radar, air and missile coverage, including over American forces in the Philippines.

The United States and the Philippines have warned that building in Scarborough would prompt a stern response, stoking fears of a military conflict.

Last month, I set out to see for myself this patch of water that has inspired bluster from two superpowers yet which Charles Darwin once described in almost poetic terms, “with a hundred fathoms, colored blue.”

Scarborough does not beckon visitors. Named after a British tea ship that crashed into its rocks in 1784, the phantom reef has long been known for shipwrecks, ensnaring Swedish steamers and French cargo ships caught in typhoons. But as I traveled up and down the coast of the Philippines looking for a boat to take me, the chief worry was China, which wrested control of the reef from the Philippines four years ago.

Everywhere I went, people were reluctant to make the journey, saying they were afraid of harassment by Chinese ships. Filipino fishermen, clutching bottles of rum and scratchy cell phone videos, described playing cat-and-mouse games in the moonlight with Chinese crews armed with water cannons and assault rifles.

“The Chinese are relentless,” Renante Etac, 40, the captain of a ship that fishes near Scarborough told me one afternoon near Infante. “There’s nothing we can do. We just have to go home.”

In Subic Bay, where the American military once maintained its largest overseas naval base, I stumbled upon the Motoryacht Isla, a boat that took a group of television journalists to Scarborough a few years ago.

But the crew was too scared to make another trip, the boat’s owner, Rafael G. Ongpin, told me. Last time, he said, the Isla was chased away by Chinese warships that maneuvered aggressively to block it, generating large waves that could have swamped it. The crew was worried that the Chinese might try to sink the Isla or take them prisoner if they returned.

But I pressed, and Mr. Ongpin found a new crew for me, led by Captain Tagapan, a quiet man with a sailor’s swagger who saw the loss of Scarborough as a bruise to his nation’s pride.

“It is time for us to stand up on our own,” he said.

On a Friday afternoon, we set sail. If all went according to plan, it would take 20 hours to get there.

The fight over Scarborough escalated in April 2012, when the Philippine Navy attempted to arrest a group of Chinese fishermen caught collecting giant clams, sharks and other protected species there. China sent ships of its own to block the arrests, and a standoff ensued, with each side accusing the other of violating its sovereignty. (Taiwan also claims sovereignty over Scarborough.)

After ten tense weeks, the United States said it had mediated an end to the dispute, with both sides agreeing to leave the shoal while negotiations continued. But while the Philippines withdrew, China never left and began blocking Philippine fishermen from entering the atoll, sometimes deploying as many as 80 vessels, many of them warships.

The episode rekindled familiar feelings of powerlessness in the Philippines, a country that endured three centuries of rule by Spain and a half-century by the United States. This spring, a proposal to equip Scarborough with an airstrip and a harbor capable of hosting navy warships appeared on a website for Chinese military enthusiasts, prompting street protests in the Philippines.

In an interview last month in Manila, the outgoing president, Benigno S. Aquino III, cut me off when I asked whether he felt regret that China had taken control of Scarborough under his watch.

“Excuse me,” he said, in a rare flash of anger. “That is Philippine territory. I do not accept the premise that we lost it.”

We motored due west through the night, with thunderstorms crackling in the distance. As dawn broke and the sky turned lava-orange, the reef appeared as a blue-teal amoeba on a navigational screen.

“That’s our only way in,” Captain Tagapan said, pointing to a small opening in the atoll’s southeast corner.

As we got closer, our radar detected three ships ahead and the mood in the pilothouse grew tense. Mr. Tagapan, who had never visited Scarborough before, played Air Supply’s “Keeping the Love Alive” on the speaker of his cell phone and took a drag on a Fortune cigarette.

“I’m praying every minute,” he said.

“We’re ready for attack,” joked the chief mate, Andres B. Arizo Jr.

It is easy to miss Scarborough Shoal. China has suggested it is an island, a term reserved in international law for land capable of supporting human habitation. The distinction would allow Beijing to claim an exclusive economic zone extending as far as 200 miles from it, including rights to oil, fish and other natural resources.

An international tribunal at The Hague is expected to rule in the coming weeks on a request by the Philippines to invalidate many of China’s claims in the South China Sea, including several related to Scarborough. China has boycotted the tribunal, arguing that ancient maps establish the sea as Chinese territory and that the tribunal has no authority to resolve a sovereignty dispute.

While the tribunal cannot decide if Scarborough belongs to China or the Philippines, Manila has asked it to declare that it is not island that can be used to establish an exclusive economic zone.

From my vantage point on the Isla, it seemed like a strong argument. As our boat approached the atoll’s entrance, I couldn’t see anything protruding from the water at all.

What I could see, though, was a Chinese coast guard trawler with the number 3062 painted on its hull. The last time the Isla had made the journey to Scarborough, the Chinese had intercepted it five miles from the shoal. We were less than a mile away now, and the Chinese had not seemed to notice.

Suddenly, we heard a whirring in the water behind us, and then a Chinese speedboat was by our side, demanding that we turn around. The man in the bamboo hat — one of two men on board — gesticulated as if conducting a symphony.

The Isla’s crew tried asking for permission to enter Scarborough, first by radio and then by shouting over to the speedboat. But the requests were met with silence.

After 15 minutes of being followed by the speedboat, the crew wanted to turn around. I asked Mr. Tagapan if we could circle back one more time or find another way in, but he was uneasy. The coast guard trawler was gaining on us, and a larger, 1,000-ton coast guard cutter equipped with water cannons had also appeared on the horizon.

“We don’t want to get shot,” Mr. Tagapan said.

As we reversed course and retreated, the Chinese trawler, number 3062, pulled within 100 feet of us and its crew snapped photos of our crew. The cutter, number 3101, came close enough for us to feel the large waves it generated.

After an hour, the Chinese ships turned back.

Not far from Scarborough, we came upon a small fishing boat, the JJ2. Captain Tagapan tied a white rag to a pole and flagged the ship down. Its 16-member crew, some wearing bandanas and Chicago Bulls jerseys, whistled and cheered as we approached.

The boat’s captain, Paolo Pumicpic Jr., told us they had encountered the Chinese coast guard a few days earlier and had also been chased away from Scarborough.

Fishermen from the Philippines, China, Taiwan and Vietnam once shared Scarborough’s bounty with minimal conflict. But the threat of harassment by the Chinese has emptied these waters. The JJ2 was the only boat we encountered in the area.

Mr. Pumicpic, whose father and grandfather had fished at Scarborough, said his crew used to catch about $1,000 worth of fish per day. Now, they manage less than $100 worth before they are forced to leave.

In one instance last year, he said, the Chinese officers boarded his boat, beat his crew with bamboo sticks, cut their fishing lines and seized their catch.

“They are salot, a plague,” he said of the Chinese coast guard. “We used to take refuge inside the shoal when the seas got rough. Now we can’t go there.” By turning away boats seeking shelter during storms, he said, China was endangering lives.

The Philippines has asked the tribunal at The Hague to rule that China is unlawfully interfering with traditional fishing and operating its law enforcement vessels in a dangerous manner at Scarborough.

But China has defended its decision to take control of the reef, arguing that its fishermen have been going to Scarborough for hundreds of years and that the Philippines began harrassing them in the 1990s.

“We have no power to avoid their plan,” said Renante Combenido, 40, a member of the crew of another fishing boat ejected from Scarborough that we encountered. “China is all-powerful.”

But as the Isla returned to shore, the crew cracked open bottles of San Miguel beer to celebrate their success, however limited, at challenging China.

The sun peeked through the morning sky, illuminating emerald mountains and volcanoes. Captain Tagapan opened a book of prayers, looked to the horizon and recited Sumasampalataya, the Apostles’ Creed.

“The Chinese might take Scarborough,” he said. “But they cannot take way the Philippines.”