THE difference, for the traveler, between a first and repeated visit is crucial. To “go back” is not “to go.” Yet old, familiar places retain a kind of magic, and all the more so when the memories are shared. For our 40th wedding anniversary year, my wife, Elena, and I returned to the place where our marriage began: the South of France. We planned to visit old haunts, the area we’d once called home. Then, we had had all the time in the world; now we could spend a week. Too, there’s a difference between 20-somethings living on a shoestring and tourists “of a certain age” who stay in fine hotels.

“Let’s do it right this time,” I said. “Let’s fly to Nice and stay where we couldn’t afford to before. Let’s ramble down Memory Lane.”

As newlyweds, on a year’s extended honeymoon, we’d lived in the gatekeeper’s cottage of a beautiful old farmhouse in Opio, near Grasse. The mailman would arrive on a motor-scooter, sputtering up the switchbacks of the driveway; the farm plow was horse-drawn. When the mistral blew in winter, the view past Cannes revealed the peaks of Corsica; the coal stove in the kitchen yielded little hot water or heat. Now Opio boasts a Club Med with a spa, and a supermarket has displaced the butcher and the baker; a golf course has replaced the olive groves. And “our” property belongs to Earl Spencer, with locked gates and well-tended lawns and a swimming pool.

It’s difficult to know, in the wake of Heisenberg and Einstein, what is absolute, what relative, and why. Do we change as witnesses, or does that which we witness change, or both; does it alter because of the viewing, and is our estimate altered by the consciousness of sight? Think of a train track and moving train; does the world pass by while we sit still, or is it the reverse? These problems of philosophy and mathematics are personal riddles also; was it always just like this, and did we fail to notice? For we have changed more than the landscape, no matter how the locals complain that the landscape has changed.

“Young and poor,” Elena said. “Old and secure. That’s us.”

THE Nice airport has been enlarged and upgraded, but you no longer exit into flower markets and tree-lined streets with cafes. Instead there’s the “rush” of modernity, and we drove away from it as if from any airport, not one that clings to the bright border of the Mediterranean. Most of the old roads are clotted with cars; others have been reconfigured with pace-slowing roundabouts. It’s a little like memory, really: these sudden dips and halts and circles, with speed bumps crisscrossing the streets. The village of St.-Paul-de-Vence — sleepy and silent the first time I saw it — has become a kind of mecca for tour buses and pilgrims on foot. The Fondation Maeght outside its walls contains the work of Braque, Chagall, Giacometti and other artists who made the region home. Bonnard, Matisse and Picasso lived in the area also, and many of them first came south at the invitation of Paul Roux, a hotelier who said, in effect, “Stay with me for the weekend and leave behind a painting or a sculpture in exchange for a good meal and bed.”

It was a brilliant arrangement, and the garden of La Colombe d’Or displays an installation by Fernand Léger; inside, there are drawings and paintings everywhere, with at least two Alexander Calders inscribed to “Mme. Roux.” The artists are gone; the art endures. And somehow every viewing gets superimposed on a previous one, so that the garden is peopled with ghosts. Now, standing rapt before the Léger, I can remember doing so when still a child and at my mother’s side. After her death I found a travel diary she’d kept about the trip: “It is only in France one eats well,” she wrote, having had lunch at La Colombe d’Or.

We also ate there with my wife’s parents on the first New Year’s Eve of our marriage. The two of them were passing through and offered to host us for an elaborate prix-fixe celebratory supper: many courses, much Champagne. The first of the dishes presented was woodcock encased in sauce, and my mother-in-law — a devoted bird-watcher and member of the Audubon Society — lost her appetite. We spent the night consoling her, assuring her that the bécasse had been gently handled as well as well cooked. Our own meal, some 40 years later, was somewhat less dramatic; we ate a basket of fresh vegetables, then snails and rabbit in blood sauce, but left the birds alone. I passed up the chance at a bottle of Château d’Yquem (550 euros; about $788 at $1.43 to the euro) for a cheap local wine. ...

Which was what we used to drink, in quantity, and often in the company of the expatriate author James Baldwin. I had met him briefly before, then by happy accident in line at the American Express office in Cannes, and we became fast friends. Those were the years Baldwin lived in self-imposed exile on La Route de la Colle, just beneath St.-Paul-de-Vence. Across the road, above the place we parked to enter Baldwin’s property, I would see an advertisement for Le Hameau, inviting the traveler in. But our own home was a dark drive away and, careening tipsily back past midnight with the insouciance of youth, we never stayed in the hotel.

Now, for the first two nights of our trip, Le Hameau was where we slept. The “hamlet’s” buildings are beautifully landscaped, and the staff’s welcome was warm. Baldwin’s home has been abandoned, however, and is now for sale: a melancholy pile of stones where once we’d laughed and talked. To see his roof tiles pillaged and his windows boarded up (though he died long years ago, in 1987) was to gaze at wreckage and think of les neiges d’antan.

That was François Villon’s plaintive query in the 15th century. “Where are,” the poet asks, “the snows of yesteryear?” On our next stop, the mountain village of Gourdon, I thought of yesteryear’s actual snows: how hard it was to drive these roads once they iced over in winter. The curves of the road are still dizzying, incised along (and sometimes through) the cliffs. By way of earning extra cash, Jacques Laporte — the caretaker of the estate where we lived — delivered propane tanks to the few shops and restaurants still open when tourism ceased. Often, I would go along to help haul the heavy canisters, and to share a coffee before the steep descent. Jacques and his wife, Odette, had been our close companions, teaching us to plant and cook and play pétanques, helping “the young marrieds” begin domestic life.

We stayed in touch by letter but had not seen one another in years, and now Odette was dead. Receiving us, Jacques wept. Our French was rusty, little used but, phrase by phrase, returning. We talked of family and friends and days gone by, of old stone masons and olive harvests and Julia Child, who had lived across the way. Jacques is well into his 80s now, frail, and full of Gallic outrage at the incompetence of those who today trim the olive trees, or fail to, and full of gratitude to his new young neighbors — a Parisian and his American wife — who have taken him under their wing. Open-armed, the couple welcomed us, and we shared a meal. The afternoon wore on. The church bells of Opio rang.

Someone once observed that, every year, you have to move a kilometer inland in order to find old Provence. It’s an approximate yardstick but does seem to be the case; the farther north you travel from the bustling seafront towns the farther back you go in time. The next village on our itinerary lay in the still-wild Luberon. Peter Mayle has done to that region what the Cannes Film Festival did to the Alpes Maritimes, but in mid-May the roads were empty and the hills and fields retained the look of ancient days. We drove to Lourmarin, a village we had summered in, in 1987 — when our daughters were still with us and not yet mothers in their turn. Here the landscape seems unaltered; a rock outcrop caught the southwest sun as it had done long years before; the olive trees were lifting, glinting, now as then.

Lourmarin has a chateau, a cluster of restaurants and shops and a great deal of charm; it announces itself (as do St.-Paul-de-Vence and Gourdon) as “One of the most beautiful villages of France.” This is the town where Albert Camus lies buried. He said the skies reminded him of those of his native Algeria — bright, wind-swept, unobstructed. He was traveling to Paris when he was in a fatal car crash. His grave has always moved me, and I have walked to it often: like many members of my generation, I cut my eyeteeth on his work. Camus and his wife lie side by side in the village cemetery, with no pride of place, just their names and dates inscribed on simple stones. The irises were blooming; soon, it would be the lavender’s turn; bees buzzed about the graves.

WE stayed two nights in a nearby village, the hill town of Bonnieux. Looking out over the Luberon valley, Le Domaine de Capelongue is breathtaking in its setting, with an ambitious restaurant (and cooking classes offered). Its chef, Edouard Loubet, also owns the Moulin de Lourmarin — a restored old mill in the center of town — but that establishment was not yet open, so we stayed at the Domaine. This is the sort of lodging we could not afford in early years, so there was a double pleasure in driving through the gates. The grounds are extraordinary, perfectly attended to; old granaries and pigeon houses built out of local stone; tiled roofs and ceramic tile floors. The whitewashed plaster walls and heavy beams evoke the distant past.

But one needn’t idealize that past; this area was emptied out at least in part by slaughter and, of course, the plague. When Pope Alexander III decreed in the 12th century that the Waldensians or Vaudois were heretics and therefore (as a religious splinter-group) should die, many thousands were annihilated brutally. So it came to pass that the village of Lourmarin was corrected in the 16th century via extinction, and the romantic-seeming ruins here attest to a leveling rage.

The spartan elegance of Capelongue stands in stark contrast to the authentically spartan Enclos des Bories a few kilometers away. The Bories are rock enclosures fashioned from field-clearing limestone, and no one is quite certain how long they have been standing here or when they were first built. They were, we know, inhabited until the mid-1800s; they date back at least to the excommunicated Vaudois in the 15th century (and no doubt long before; some claim that these unmortared walls and corbelled huts are Neolithic in their origin). To see the deep-dug cisterns and the threshing floors and stone apiaries and pens where they enclosed domestic animals, hoping to keep wild ones at bay, is to see how rough-hewn was the lifestyle of the early inhabitants of the Vaucluse, and how austere.

Eating well remains, of course, the best revenge. One night we dined in the town of Bonnieux, at the Hôtel César, with a panoramic view of the valley of the Luberon and the village of Lacoste — where the once-ruined chateau of the Marquis de Sade has been restored by Pierre Cardin. The last time I saw that castle it was a pile of rubble; now the marquis himself would no doubt approve. Another night we ate in the valley on the way to the high Fort of Buoux at a country restaurant we’d visited more than 20 years before: Auberge de l’Aiguebrun. In both these half-filled dining rooms the reverent attention paid to what was cooked and what was served — whether fish or fowl, amuse-bouche to commence the meal or cheese and a sweet course to complete it — had a kind of formal gravity the French still take for granted and that, for us, is rare.

Our next stop was the valley of Les Baux, where the rock is bauxite, not limestone, and the climate even harsher. This landscape — from Aix-en-Provence to Avignon, from to Arles and Nîmes — is full of Roman ruins (Provence derives from the Latin “Provincia”), and the kind of light that enthralled, among others, van Gogh and Cézanne.

The written word was equally crucial in France. When I first started reading “Aucassin and Nicolette” or “The Lais of Marie de France” — written in Anglo-Norman in the 12th century — I fell under the spell the tales cast. And for this writer — now more than three times the age I was at first encounter — Provence remains the land of love: fierce yet sonorous. The names of the great troubadours are themselves a song: Bernard de Ventadour, Marcabru, Bertran de Born, Guillaume IX de Poitiers. This last named was first born, in 1071; Giraud Riquier, “the last of the troubadours,” died in 1294.

So the bards took root and flourished in Provence. It’s not, at first sighting, a landscape for men with lutes and plumes and sonnets to their mistresses’ eyebrows; it looks both too bright and severe. Les Baux is a perched village with a vengeance, looming above the valley like a raptor about to swoop down. Its lords were, according to the poet Frédéric Mistral, “warriors all, vassals never.” Dante is said to have used it as the landscape for his hell. The crest of the hill has been left unretouched, but the low streets are a hive of commerce, olive-wood sculptors and jewelers and cafes and boutiques. The grand hotel restaurant L’Oustau de Baumanière lies underneath the village, as does the slightly less magisterial Cabro d’Or, but we chose a country inn, Domaine de Valmouriane, for our trip’s final night.

This is the kind of lodging that retains the feel of a once-private home; there’s a library to read in, a room for billiards, and a swimming pool and tennis court that suggests a family establishment rather more than a four-star hotel. The welcome is gracious, the food first-rate, and one has the sense that, 40 years hence, the vegetable garden will still produce the table’s greens, and herbes de Provence will flavor the night’s meal. May that prove to be the case. May those who marry this year eat and drink and walk and talk and sleep there decades hence. May the breeze be blowing gently through white wooden half-closed shutters, the music be playing softly in the vestibule, and the sommelier approach your table with his suggestions for wine.

“YOU have been in the region before?” asked the proprietor of Le Hameau.

“Yes, often. But not in a long time.”

“I myself am from Torino. You know Torino?”

“A little.”

“That car there, it is mine.” He pointed to a bright red sleekly gleaming Ferrari in the parking lot. “Also the Lamborghini beside it. And the Maserati.”

“Formidable,” I said.

“You must come for a drive.”

“Alas, we have to leave.”

“In which case, the next time.”

Grasse and its environs have a special perfumed air. The lavender had not yet bloomed, but roses were in flower; yellow genet flamed above the low stone hotel walls. The sky had that perfect clarity you see in paintings of Provence; cypress trees framed the far view.

“Next time,” I assured him. “Gladly.”

Then the Italian gentleman, learning that this was our anniversary trip, offered Elena some perfume from Grasse and — for both of us — a bottle of Champagne. We thanked him and promised to come back again and carried the gift bottle unopened until our final night at Valmouriane. In the morning we would drive to Nice and return to the workaday world.

“Let’s sit outside a minute,” said Elena, “and smell the orange trees.”

We did. Beyond, a small rain rained. And, at our balcony table, as darkness gathered and the birds fell silent, we sat and raised our glasses to the shared past, the present, and what is yet to come.

WE’LL ALWAYS HAVE BONNIEUX

ST.-PAUL-DE-VENCE

Le Hameau, 528 Route de la Colle; (33-4) 93-32-80-24; .le-hameau.com. There are rooms in the central hotel and clustered near the swimming pool, as well as “hamlet-like” above the courtyard; no restaurant but a delightful eating terrace for breakfast (15 euros, about $21, per person). Do not rush.

La Colombe d’Or; (33-4) 93-32-80-02; la-colombe-dor.com. There are a few rooms available for rent besides the restaurant; one can study the art at leisure and, after breakfast, wander out the gate and into the streets of the town. Just opposite the entrance, there’s a boule court where old men and young women play regularly; buy a coffee and watch.

La Terasse, (outside the walls of the village, an “easy” local bistro and pizzeria), 20, Chemin des Trioux, St. Paul de Vence; (33-4) 93-32-85-60. This is one of many restaurants that make St. Paul worth a visit: unpretentious and noisy with — as its name, “the Terrace,” suggests — an outdoor view.

BONNIEUX

Le Domaine de Capelongue, Les Claparèdes; (33-4) 90-75-98-52; capelongue.com. A beautiful setting, yet the rooms were rather too “high concept” for our taste. One can make do with a square toilet seat behind a slatted creaking door and sink in the bedroom behind the grand bed. But towel hooks would have been welcome, and a bar of soap, and electrical outlets to use; the bedside tables with their outsize if low-wattage globes made it difficult to read.

Hôtel César, Place de la Liberté; (33 -4) 90-75-96-35; hotel-cesar.com. It’s difficult to park in Bonnieux, and best to do so in one of the designated areas just outside town. The walk through steep and cobbled streets will whet your appetite, however. The view from the hotel dining room is both far and wide.

Auberge de L’Aiguebrun, Domaine de la Tour (33-4) 90-04-47-00; aubergedelaiguebrun.fr. Tucked away in a valley and under the road, this old-fashioned auberge — the closest translation is “country inn” — provides a traditional welcome, and the food is first-rate.

NEAR LES BAUX DE PROVENCE

Oustau de Baumaniere, Mas de Carita, Route d’Arles; (33-4) 90 -54-33-07; oustaudebaumaniere.com. This is a grand and courtly place to eat, both for lunch and dinner; it is expensive but worth it; reservations required. As with La Colombe d’Or, it’s possible also to rent rooms — tucked under the cliffs of Les Baux, which you may well desire to do after a meal-ending Cognac or final glass of Champagne.

Bistrot Découverte, 19, boulevard Victor Hugo, St. Rémy de Provence; (33-4) 90-92-34 -49. One of many local restaurants in the town that Van Gogh frequented.

Domaine de Valmouriane, Ancienne Route des Baux, St. Rémy de Provence; (33-4) 90-92-44-62; valmouriane.com.