If the wind is right, the scent of chocolate will waft up 35th Street in Brooklyn from the waterfront toward the commercial strip of Sunset Park, winding past pornography shops, liquor wholesalers and building-supply warehouses. Once you pass under the Gowanus Expressway, there is no mistaking it, even amid the exhaust of the 18-wheelers jockeying for position on the cobblestone streets in front of the loading docks of Industry City.

Industry City is a complex of 16 buildings on the edge of Sunset Park, wedged between Costco and the Metropolitan Detention Center. Formerly known as Bush Terminal, a wholesalers’ port throughout the 20th century, the facility is undergoing a $100 million update, moving from a somewhat derelict warren of artists’ studios to an upscale, artisan-friendly commercial space.

Li-Lac Chocolates, with its purple banner and inviting aromas, became one of Industry City’s more high-profile tenants when it opened in October.

Wraparound windows invite visitors to observe the chocolate-making process — copper kettles bubbling with sugar, the jiggling enrobing machine, a conveyor belt that shakes loose excess chocolate from candied orange slices. “Who doesn’t love chocolate?” said Anthony Luna, 17, a senior at Sunset Park High School who landed a seasonal packing job for $9 an hour during the holiday rush.

But in fact, some people in Sunset Park were less than excited to welcome Li-Lac to the neighborhood. One of them was Elizabeth Yeampierre. As the executive director of Uprose, a historically Latino community organization, Ms. Yeampierre condemned Li-Lac’s grand opening on Facebook, describing the planned festivities as “a celebration of gentrification” and urging residents to boycott the shop. Though Ms. Yeampierre has since scaled back her criticism — she later said she was speaking for herself, not Uprose — her comments might have contributed to a call for a police presence at the opening event, which attracted more than 1,000 visitors.

Chris Taylor, 52, a co-owner of Li-Lac, said the potential for a boycott caught him off guard. “I got an email from someone in the community two days before the opening and thought it was a joke,” he recalled. “It took me a few days to realize it was serious.”

Mr. Taylor expressed surprise that Li-Lac would be cast as a gentrifier. “Our founder was an immigrant from Greece,” he said. “Two of the three current co-owners are immigrants.” One of them, Anwar Khoder, 54, emigrated from Lebanon to Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, nearly three decades ago and worked as a taxi driver before becoming Li-Lac’s master chocolatier.

“We’re locals,” said another owner, Anthony Cirone, 49. “We’re not an unknown corporate entity owned by unnamed people in faraway places.”

But the idea that a sudden influx of money might disrupt the character of a neighborhood should surprise no one. “The industrial waterfront has always been a walk-to-work community,” Ms. Yeampierre said. “It needs to be a place where blue-collar people can live and work. I was reacting to what I was seeing as a trend to hurt the composition of the neighborhood.” She expressed fear that high-end shops selling artisanal wares — places like Liddabit Sweets, Blue Marble Ice Cream and Colson Patisserie, which have all set up shop in Industry City — would transform the neighborhood into another Dumbo or Chelsea, mowing down smaller establishments.

And yet Li-Lac is itself a victim of high rents and real-estate churn.

Ten years ago, Li-Lac Chocolates moved from its original home at 120 Christopher Street in Manhattan, where it had been for 81 years, to a storefront on Jane Street. There was no room for manufacturing in the West Village, so the factory occupied a smaller industrial spot farther south in Sunset Park until Industry City became available. “We were ready to throw in the towel on New York, because making chocolate in Manhattan is no longer viable,” Mr. Taylor said. “Our store on Jane Street is surrounded by shops with purses and shoes without price tags, so that tells you something.”

The 10,000-square-foot Industry City facility is 15 times larger than the West Village storefront — and the tiny Manhattan shop costs 18 times more per square foot, Mr. Taylor said. According to Mr. Taylor, many chocolate wholesalers are moving to Pennsylvania, where rents and taxes are lower. With Li-Lac being one of Manhattan’s oldest chocolate companies, “we wanted to be in New York,” he said.

Some local business owners “uphill,” on the commercial stretches of Fourth and Fifth Avenues, report that Industry City has actually been a boon to their operations. Jose Luis Hernandez, 39, a co-owner of Café Zona Sur, a tin-ceilinged fusion bistro that offers free-range chicken and a risotto of the day, said he often received 30- or 40-person catering orders from the complex.

Renée Giordano, 63, executive director of the Sunset Park Business Improvement District, noted that the products made at Industry City “aren’t heavy competition” for the existing businesses on Fifth Avenue. The bustling street is dotted with 24-hour check-cashing services, sneaker stores, no-frills laundromats, restaurants and barber shops that stay open for card games long after the floors have been swept clean.

So far, Ms. Giordano said, she has not noticed people trickling uphill to patronize the shops on Fifth Avenue after visiting Industry City. “But as long as those businesses interact with and hire from the community, it can’t hurt,” she said.

“Gentrification will probably come up at any community board meeting you’d ever attend in New York City,” said Daniel Murphy, 44, chairman of Brooklyn’s Community Board 7, which includes Sunset Park. “We see Industry City as a change. If you see every change as a threat, your amygdala is too active.” He pointed out that neighborhoods are constantly in flux. As he put it, “You can never walk down the same city block twice.”

The adage certainly holds true in Sunset Park, one of the most diverse neighborhoods in Brooklyn. Over the years, it has been predominantly Scandinavian, then Irish and Italian, then Puerto Rican and then Mexican. Today, Community District 7 — bordered by 15th Street to the north, Eighth Avenue or Fort Hamilton Parkway to the east, 65th Street to the south and the waterfront to the west — is largely Latino and Asian. The number of non-Hispanic whites increased almost 8 percent between the 2000 and 2010 census, but that demographic group is still a minority.

As for its character, Sunset Park, despite a remarkable housing stock that is attracting those priced out of so-called brownstone Brooklyn, shares more than a bit of the grittiness of the industrial waterfront. Mr. Murphy said that is part of the neighborhood’s charm.

“We’re not about being twee or making the neighborhood clean and nice,” he said. “We like it messy. It’s New York City — it’s the kind of neighborhood that Walt Whitman would have walked through 150 years ago.”