SEOUL, South Korea — North Korea has announced that it will not accept any foreign tourists beginning Friday because of fears of the Ebola virus, three agencies that take tourists to the isolated country said on Thursday.

The news came as the country said it was stepping up inspections and quarantine measures at its main airport, borders and ports to guard against the spread of the deadly virus, which has killed thousands of people in the latest outbreak.

“Three days ago, they said that anybody who’s been to West Africa would have to provide a doctor’s certificate stating that they don’t have Ebola,” said Gareth Johnson of Young Pioneer Tours, a travel operator based in China. “And then today, they just said no foreign tourists at all.”

Mr. Johnson said that he had received the notice from his North Korean partners and that one of his tour guides who was visiting the North with a group of foreign tourists had also confirmed it through the authorities there. Mr. Johnson said his company had to cancel its plans to take a group of 20 tourists to the North on Monday.

He said the ban on entry for foreign tourists applied to all of North Korea. Mr. Johnson called it a “complete blanket ban,” regardless of a foreign tourist’s origin. David Thompson of Juche Travel Services in London said his company was contacting all customers who have booked North Korean tours in the coming months. “At the moment, we do not know when the country will reopen its border to tourism,” he said.

Nick Bonner at Koryo Tours, another China-based company that offers tours to North Korea, confirmed the ban but said it was still unclear whether North Korea was trying to ban all tourists or only those from regions that have had an Ebola outbreak.

Both Mr. Johnson and Mr. Bonner said they were not sure whether the ban would also affect foreign diplomats or businesspeople.

An official at the Beijing office of Air Koryo, the North Korean state airline, said that no flights to the capital, Pyongyang, had been canceled, indicating that nontourist visitors would still be allowed to enter.

About 6,000 Western tourists visit North Korea each year, according to estimates tallied by NK News, a website that specializes in North Korean news. The State Department has warned Americans against traveling to the North after the country recently detained several American tourists on charges of committing hostile acts against the country.