It was a vacation I had been dreaming about for years: the classic California road trip up the historic State Route 1 with my husband and our 5-year-old daughter, Frankie, and 3-year-old son, Finn. It was a trip that was meant to show them the sheer magnitude of Big Sur, the jagged artistry of the coastline, the endless blue of the Pacific, the raw, wild beauty of God’s country. It was a trip that they would remember for the rest of their lives!

But there was a hitch: We were going tech-free — no iPads, no movies, not so much as a singing Elsa watch (excluding parental phones). How long until someone whined? How long until my will shriveled up and I handed the trip over to Disney Junior and “Jake and the Never Land Pirates”? My children had registered their complaints — loudly. But my husband, Devin, and I would not be moved. We didn’t need two-dimensional images to be happy. We could talk. We could play games. This trip would be about Douglas firs and deep thoughts if it killed us.

It would be an abridged version of the iconic California coastal drive. We were going from Southern California to Northern, from Santa Barbara to Capitola, a beach town just outside of Santa Cruz, to visit my friend Laura and her family.

The route was simple: Take the 101 north to San Luis Obispo, turn left toward the water, and follow the Pacific Ocean to Capitola via State Route 1. (In Southern California, it’s known as the Pacific Coast Highway; in the central coast, it’s the Big Sur Coast Highway — even the name sounds like a vacation.) It should have taken five or six hours. I say again: It should have.

The car was packed with popcorn, bunny crackers, sandwiches, water and half the produce section of Whole Foods. We were apparently of the opinion that there was no food north of San Luis Obispo. We may have been tech-free, but we weren’t foolish.

A day earlier, on the advice of a friend, we went to the Ohana Fun Company toy store in Carpinteria, just south of Santa Barbara. The parts of our Chevy Equinox that were not stuffed with grocery bags were filled with coloring pads, sticker books, metallic colored pencils, Lego sets, games and enough Melissa & Doug paraphernalia to open our own franchise. We were a family of Jack Kerouacs with glitter stencils.

We drove rather unceremoniously to the 101. After all the hype, my children were understandably underwhelmed by the 101. It’s a highway, after all, and despite being lined with palm trees, not an especially beautiful one. But as we made our way north, the horizon grew wider, vaster, farther away. We passed rolling green fields and, once firmly inside the wine country of Santa Ynez and Los Olivos, the fields turned to geometric plots of grape vines.

My daughter, her wide blue eyes as round as quarters, was captivated by the view: Verdant, peaceful and fairly monotonous, it was a perfect, if challenging, place to play I Spy. My son was uncharacteristically quiet. His cheeks were flushed and I could see in his glassy eyes that he had a fever before I even touched his forehead.

We had just passed San Luis Obispo when I broke the tech-free rule. I took out my phone to look up the nearest Urgent Care center. Turns out that the Morro Bay Urgent Care facility is a great place to learn you have strep throat, especially if you’re 3. The nurse loves children, the doctor goes by John, and there’s ample room to drive your Lego truck while you wait for the results of your throat culture.

We were supposed to be halfway to Big Sur by now, but before we could glimpse so much as one majestic vista, we had to wait for the nurse to mix Finn’s antibiotics. Half an hour later, amoxicillin administered, we were off. Again.

It was nearly lunchtime when we arrived at Montaña de Oro State Park, just south of Morro Bay. We decided to backtrack a few minutes to see what my friend Laura had told me was “the best secret park in California.”

We drove through the late morning fog as the park unfolded before us like the opening sequence of a suspense thriller. The ground was covered in dusty purple heather; shaggy, peeling eucalyptus trees swayed in the breeze; and the dark gray Pacific revealed itself to us slowly and deliberately, a sleeping giant, heaving long waves on the shore.

We opened the windows, and whether it was the sweet, damp air that filled the car, or the antibiotics already at work (not likely), Finn was smiling and laughing for the first time that day. There were a lot of “yeas!” as soon as I told them it was picnic-at-the-beach time.

My family ran full speed to the beach. Is there a better antidote to sweaty car feet than cool, damp sand? The sky was heavy and gray, the beach was wide and empty, and as the waves crashed on the smooth brown sand, Frankie spotted a single cold, brave surfer, our only company that day.

The children hunted for seashells, yelled into the wind, gathered sand for a doomed castle and finally, having given all their energy to the beach, agreed to sit down long enough to eat a peanut butter and jelly sandwich at a picnic table I had found.

We reluctantly piled back into the car. Finn, his dirty blond curls curlier than ever after the beach, asked if we were going to see any animals, so I told him there would be elephant seals.

“What do they do?”

“They lie on the beach.”

“No thanks, Mom.”

I decided I’d resell them on the elephant seals in 100 miles. In the meantime, we drove past a massive rock sitting out in Morro Bay like an ancient geological lump, an inert volcano rising out of the earth. The children loved how spooky it looked as the last of the morning’s fog lifted around it, giving the craggy monster a menacing feeling.

We were six hours into the journey, and I noticed that without the vexing question of Dora or Thomas on the iPad, the kids were more relaxed, which meant we were more relaxed. A happy peacefulness settled over the back seat. They were calm, sweet and behaving exactly how I want them to behave anytime we’re with people who don’t like kids.

So much of having little children is just keeping them safe and alive. I don’t actually sit down and talk to them as much as I’d like or as much as I should.

“What do you guys think of California?”

“Mommy, may I please have some popcorn?” This was Frankie.

“MOMMY, IF FRANKIE IS GETTING POPCORN I WANT MORE POPCORN THAN FRANKIE!” And this was Finn.

I gave up on a bonding moment and passed the popcorn.

There was a mood shift somewhere on the stretch from Cambria to the elephant seals, which is only a 15-minute drive. But that was enough to let boredom slip in.

“Finn, do you want me to tell you the whole movie of ‘Frozen’? O.K., I will,” said my daughter, not waiting for a reply. Then the unimaginable: She began to recite the movie, plot point by excruciating plot point. I was ready to burst into tears myself — but then, look at that! We’d arrived!

There it was: the Piedras Blancas elephant seal rookery, playground of seals, whales, dolphins, otters and other sea creatures. This was the pièce de résistance of our trip! Nature at its finest! So, of course, Frankie wanted to stay in the car. I almost relented. Until Devin reminded me: This trip wasn’t just iPad free; it was also about making our city kids appreciate the natural world. Or at least see it.

Out of the car she climbed, a grumpy, haughty teenager in the body of a 5-year-old. But her bad mood was short lived.

We didn’t know if we were going to see any seals. We were filled with the traveler’s dread of not seeing the nature we had invested in. Please let there be a seal of some kind. Or a cool bird. Even a sea gull would be O.K.!

But then: Look at that thing! A giant brown earthworm wiggling in the sand. We saw one! We made a memory!

That was when we saw the beach move. The entire beach. Holy cow, there were a zillion sea lions and elephant seals right there. They were all tossing sand on their mountainous torsos and long, squishy trunks.

A few lumbered forward, wriggling their bodies into the surf. Some just lay there, brown and gray flesh heaving on the sand; others occasionally barked at no one in particular. It was like watching an army of prehistoric creatures taking refuge on a beachhead. The children, laughing and pointing, could have stayed for hours. But Big Sur was waiting.

The drive north was filled with beautiful calm. The mountains were our only witnesses, rising out of the earth like soft green dinosaurs. The trees swayed with every light breeze off the ocean. And I realized: When you’re surrounded by a storybook landscape, a road trip doesn’t feel like one. This was a private tour of the gardens of the gods.

And soon we were rounding white-knuckle bends on a mountainside, climbing higher into the sky until the view of the Pacific was something I had only ever seen from a plane. I looked at my children — sound asleep. I was tempted to wake them, to show them what a postcard looks like in real life. But they needed sleep.

And there is something inherently unsatisfying about a small child’s reaction to a place like Big Sur. They just haven’t been alive long enough to know what a rare beauty it is. They missed it all.

Half an hour later they woke up, just as we were whizzing past strawberry and artichoke fields. Quietly and happily, as well-rested children will, they started playing Guess the Character, which is basically 20 Questions but the answer is always Darth Vader. And then, Frankie:

“Mommy, are we there yet?”

Nine hours and 250 miles after we started, I looked out at Capitola, a cheery beach town populated in candy-colored houses. There were a dozen surfers on the waves, the sun dipping low behind them, as Devin steered the car into the driveway of the blue Victorian house. Laura and her dog came bounding toward us.

“Yes, sweetheart, we are.”

IF YOU GO

What to See

If you are driving up State Route 1, ignore all the well-meaning folks who tell you to tour Hearst Castle. The best things to do on this trip have less to do with great wealth and everything to do with Mother Nature.

­Morro Rock is worth a slight detour if only to imagine what the world looked like 21 million years ago (the rock is estimated to be that old). It’s 576 feet tall, and the only prehistoric volcano of the “Nine Sisters” that sits out in the water. They don’t call it the Gibraltar of the Pacific for nothing. morrobay.com­/rock.htm.

­A visit to the Piedras Blancas Rookery is like watching a National Geographic video in the flesh — in the big, fat, blubbery, elephant seal flesh. If you’re lucky, you may also glimpse an orca, a humpback whale or a bottlenose dolphin. elephantseal.org.

Where to Eat

­The colorful cushions of Nepenthe Restaurant only add to its charm. Order something off the upscale-diner menu — a vegetarian burger, a side of fries and a cold beer (and a mac and cheese with carrot sticks for the kids) — then sit back and take in a view that will leave you speechless. nepenthebigsur­.com.

Where to Stay

Lucia Lodge is possibly the most beautiful, perfect place in the world — unless you’re a sleepwalker. The 1950s-style cabins are perched right on the side of the mountain with nothing between you and the great Pacific but a few sea gulls and a picket fence. Rates start at $180 for a double. lucialodge­.com.