1. FRANK OCEAN “Channel Orange” (Def Jam) The moody introspection of a soul-ballad man fuses with the metaphor-making skills of a rapper in the sparse, aching songs that fill Frank Ocean’s official debut album. Even with some resemblances to Prince and R. Kelly, he’s an unusual character for R&B: estranged but observant, admitting an attraction to a man, finding emptiness where others find material or emotional comfort. And in their sound as well as their lyrics, his songs create hollow spaces that they can only sometimes fill. As the tracks make eerie, restless dissolves between instruments and electronics, the songs melt down and recast themselves, again and again.

2. FIONA APPLE “The Idler Wheel Is Wiser Than the Driver of the Screw and Whipping Cords Will Serve You More Than Ropes Will Ever Do” (Epic) Fiona Apple’s fourth studio album teeters, moment to moment, between obsessive confession and dark vaudeville. Its songs grapple with jealousy, insecurity, loneliness, lust and overwhelming self-consciousness. But they take place in a wide-open musical space: a studio collaboration between Ms. Apple, usually at her piano, and Charley Drayton, playing all sorts of percussion. For songs rooted in show tunes and classical music as well as rock, the rhythms are both a playground and a testing ground, exposing Ms. Apple’s voice even as they propel her to take chances.

3. BOB DYLAN “Tempest” (Columbia) Sure, his voice is a wreck. But nothing any prettier could encompass the bitterness, sorrow, lust, nastiness, longing, vengeance and backhanded humor that course through the songs. The music imagines some phantom roadhouse where blues, honky-tonk, doo-wop, an old-timey ballad or an Irish waltz might materialize; the verses roll on and on, with a little doggerel but a lot that cuts to the bone. Envisioning death and destruction, the songs stay ornery to the end.

4. KENDRICK LAMAR “good kid, m.A.A.d. city” (TDE/Aftermath/Interscope) Kendrick Lamar wades through contradictions on his second album. He’s from Compton, Calif., gangsta rap’s home turf in the 1980s and ’90s, and in some ways he’s an old-fashioned hip-hop storyteller, chronicling a cityscape still shaped by poverty, gangs, crime and police, over tracks that echo both ’70s soul and vintage gangsta rap. But he’s no gangster. In a story line that moves from youthful misjudgments to grown-up repentance he’s an uneasy and mournful witness: trying (and failing) to steer clear of bad company, watching the casualties pile up, wishing things would change.

5. GRIZZLY BEAR “Shields” (Warp) Grizzly Bear clarifies its music without simplifying it on its fourth album. Vocals are less hazed in overdubs, drums are pushier, lyrics are slightly less enigmatic as they ponder intimacy and distance. Yet the new songs are still labyrinths of tension and release; there’s no telling which way they might waft or surge at any given instant. Lavish with musicianly details, the songs can linger over vocal harmonies, dart ahead as briskly strummed folk-rock, drift into psychedelic pastorales, build elegant chamber-pop interludes or find a haunted solitude. The convolutions are never forced, but perpetually questing.

6. ALABAMA SHAKES “Boys & Girls” (ATO) This isn’t a soul revival. It’s plain old soul, and the only gimmick is that there’s no gimmick. Alabama Shakes are a small-town Southern band with a singer, Brittany Howard, now 24, who earns Janis Joplin comparisons because she’s dynamic, direct, improvisational and raw. The band stays steadfast and proudly unvarnished; the songs call for perseverance and forthrightness, and go on to embody both.

7. NORAH JONES “Little Broken Hearts” (Blue Note) Norah Jones modestly (of course) but thoroughly overhauls her music here. The 100 percent organic, folky-jazzy whisperer has metamorphosed into a deft pop songwriter, with pithy breakup and post-breakup songs — sometimes doleful, sometimes sly — that turn a handful of moving parts into mechanisms of catchiness. With Danger Mouse as producer and songwriting collaborator, the instrumental sounds are often tweaked toward the unnatural, becoming warped memories of themselves. In one song a murder threat arrives as sweetly as a lullaby.

8. METZ It’s just about always clobbering time for Metz, a three-man Canadian band that has reclaimed and distilled post-punk into a galloping, scrabbling, feedback-laced catharsis. The arrangements and production on “Metz” (Sub Pop) focus the music into a bristling, concentrated attack, so fierce that the complaints that fill the lyrics come across as full-blown existential crises.

9. BETTYE LAVETTE “Thankful N’ Thoughtful” (Anti-) Along with a rip-roaring autobiography, “A Woman Like Me” (Blue Rider Press), the soul singer Bettye LaVette marked her 50th year as a performer with this cannily chosen assortment of songs about alienation: romantic, political, psychological and philosophical. Her voice bites into every one, from Neil Young’s “Everybody Knows This Is Nowhere” to Gnarls Barkley’s “Crazy,” drawing lessons informed by her unerring sense of drama and by the scarred resilience of the blues.

10. DJ RASHAD “Teklife Vol. 1: Welcome to the Chi” (Lit City Trax) The budget is minimal and the creativity extreme for DJ Rashad, who makes music to accompany footwork, the competitive dance style that has been a local Chicago phenomenon for more than a decade. With the shallow, brittle sounds of cheap drum machines and keyboards, stray vocal snippets and very rarely, out of nowhere, a recognizable instrument or chord, DJ Rashad sets up twitching, spattering rhythms, then splinters and fractures them; it’s ultra-austere music that keeps ambushing itself.

Top Songs

BONNIE RAITT “Not Cause I Wanted To” (Redwing)

TAYLOR SWIFT “We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together” (Big Machine)

PURITY RING “Fineshrine” (4AD)

BRUCE SPRINGSTEEN “Rocky Ground” (Columbia)

BEACH HOUSE “Myth” (Sub Pop)

USHER “Climax” (RCA)

KELLIE PICKLER “Stop Cheatin’ on Me” (BNA)

ANGEL HAZE “Cleaning Out My Closet” (Noizy Cricket/Universal Republic)

SPOEK MATHAMBO “Put Some Red on It” (Sub Pop)