MILAN — Eye-popping color, upscale vacation clothes and rich accessories dominate the summer 2013 men’s wear season — yet Italy is said to be in financial meltdown.

In Milan, it is as if those urgent encounters between the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and the Italian prime minister, Mario Monti, have never happened. Spread out the welcome mat! Bring on the Asian tourists! And let the luxury good times roll.

Although there are severe problems in the euro zone, an upbeat message ran through the weekend shows.

Jil Sander’s return to her brand was a pure and polished affirmation of her belief in sophisticated minimalism, stroked with color.

Donatella Versace brought on the gladiators, calling her collection of gilt and pugilist glamour “combat rock.” (Think gilded strappings worn over the new Versace underwear line.)

Salvatore Ferragamo was doused in color. And even the streamlined outerwear from Burberry’s Christopher Bailey had a metallic glint.

Ms. Sander’s return to her own label after an absence of seven years was more than respectable: It was a clear, clean and precise rendition of everything the designer holds dear.

Far from an ode to the past, the Jil Sander man has grown up from his boyish beginnings in the 1990s — even if there was a faint reference in those sober shorts to what might have been men’s casual wear in the German designer’s postwar childhood.

An impressive variety of ideas included graphic Jacquard patterns inspired by the contemporary artists Blinky Palermo and Robert Mangold. A honeycomb effect was another classy way of creating geometric print.

“Clarity, integrity and sophisticated even when it is simple,” said the designer, who proved that she could bring her own authority to the brand she founded 40 years ago.

The vivid, metallic pieces that ran through a sober Burberry Prorsum show were a smart way of lightening up the collection’s serious side.

“Come rain or shine” was how Mr. Bailey labeled his chic severity, as slim, dark suits were given a flash of brightly colored metallic sheen or one of those signature raincoats appeared in shocking pink or cyber blue.

The designer said the title was an obvious allusion to Burberry as a rainwear company.

“But I like the idea more philosophically, thinking about the serious part of the collection that is very authentic and sartorial, classic and traditionally constructed,” Mr. Bailey said. “It is important to build up something more positive but with a certain gravitas.”

The lightning strikes amid the suits and the military sportswear hit just the right jolt in a collection that gave a cool edge — give or take weird metallic sandals — to the classics.

“Back to our roots!” exclaimed Stefano Gabbana, referring to his design partner Domenico Dolce’s Sicilian background, which was the essence of their Dolce & Gabbana show.

Noble, touching and truly authentic, the models were serenaded on stage by a band redolent of the stones and scrub of a Sicilian village.

A family range of figures, drawn from across the southern Italian region, walked the runway: small boys with short legs and sturdy menfolk. They mostly wore shorts, in 1950s style, cut into the waist with a widening leg.

At first it seemed it was the emotional atmosphere rather than the clothes that counted. Yet this was a well-thought-out range of sportswear — the square-cut, deep-sleeve tops offering a new proportion, the shape underlined by horizontal stripes. This fine show seemed rooted in the fertile earth of the Dolce & Gabbana heritage.

Blinding David Hockney colors like swimming pool turquoise with coral and leaf green were not the only innovation at Salvatore Ferragamo. The designer Massimiliano Giornetti also dared to change the footwear from sober leather to vividly colored sneakers, which could mean yellow, green and red all in one shoe.

“It was the idea of a piece of art, pop culture and Los Angeles — that is where Salvatore Ferragamo started,” said Mr. Giornetti, who took his Hockney theme rather too literally. (His own attire was a symphony of creamy surf colors).

Yet this jolt of color — especially as just a touch on a white collar — brought energy to the conventional label. And the sneakers offered the Ferragamo customer a new sportswear category.

Sport is always in the men’s wear air. Even before the arrival of the U.S. sports heroes Amar’e Stoudemire, Henrik Lundqvist and Victor Cruz, stars of basketball, hockey and football, respectively, the Calvin Klein collection already had been labeled by the designer Italo Zucchelli as “the evolution of the American hero.”

The athletes sat front row, wearing formal tailoring. But the runway show started with an homage to a Calvin Klein basic — denim. Although the collection was inspired by California, the colors were subdued and neutral. The intrigue was in the textures: A layer of mesh or a misty nylon for zippered jackets and a flower pattern that, in its dark blue hue, looked manly. Mr. Zucchelli is true to the founder’s legacy and that is the strength of his work.

At Bottega Veneta, Tomas Maier held fast to his particular vision of casual luxury. He created an ode to a sweater, or rather its loose and easy shape, laced at the neckline, safari style — although the designer said backstage that Brittany sailors also were in his mind. Not to mention, perhaps, American Indians with the fringed suede tunics in ginger and matching moccasins.

The only deviations from the sweater idea were regular mannish suits printed with a splodge of faint flower pattern or suits made from floral organza as a riff on women’s wear.

Mr. Maier seems totally in command of his vision of luxury. It is about the pleasure felt by the wearer, offering the ultimate in stealth wealth.

“It’s dedicated to the gladiator — not about physical fighting, but a man from that moment — and I was thinking a little bit about the Memphis movement in the 1980s,” said Donatella Versace, referring to the Italian postmodern design and architecture group in describing the essence of her Versace show.

The decision for a brand to branch out from clothes to underwear has never had such a dramatic effect as the models, wearing filmy garments anchored by gilded-leather holsters, displaying the latest look in Versace underpants.

Although those garments might have seemed more likely to land on a film set than in Everyman’s bedroom, Ms. Versace had other ideas. They included tailoring in Jacquard weaves for streamlined suits for the man who likes the designer’s V-shape of bravura shoulders slimming down at the hips. A “V” for victory for the alpha male.

“A new way to do safari — with a bit of David Bowie’s London to Mombasa,” said Ennio Capasa of Costume National. He was referring to the sand white vests and jackets with soft pants that opened the show, segueing into graphic black- and-white striped trousers.

Mr. Capasa also hit on the bright blue that is already a standout shade of the summer 2013 season. And when it was back to black, there was still the tension of texture as shiny-surfaced coats contrasted with semi-sheer shirts.

The flood of Asian shoppers on the city’s Monte Napoleone street shows who is bolstering the luxury business, although Gildo Zegna, chief executive of his family company, says that Brazilians and Russians add to the score.

The Ermenegildo Zegna look for the runway was as smooth as silk, the fabric woven into the collection in complex mixes, giving a sheen to formal and sportswear.

“And it is very light for traveling,” said Mr. Zegna, referring to a wine silk coat and to suits in mixes of silk and cotton. This classic symphony was played out not just in the materials but also in the clothes: a double-breasted silhouette; some sportier jackets, particularly in the discreet tropical plant pattern.

That idea of print seemed fresh for Zegna and enlarged the scope of a company that is never going to be a trend setter but bends as gracefully as a field of young bamboo to the prevailing winds.