People only seem to mention going to Houston for work or study. And while “summering in Houston” is unlikely to become a thing, there has to be more to the city than office towers and libraries since so many of those who do go decide to stay. After more than a decade of frenetic growth, Texas’s biggest city is now America’s fourth largest, and according to several studies, its youngest (more millennials than boomers) and its most ethnically and culturally diverse. So it’s not surprising that Houston offers an amazing gastronomic mix — from taco stands, chicken and waffle joints and all manner of barbecue to Greek, Persian and Vietnamese cuisine — most with an attitude-free vibe. Enriched by the two great American traditions of immigration and philanthropy, the city’s ever-growing museums strike a balance between an expansive global outlook and strong local support. And the bayou in the heart of the city when it was founded in 1836 has been revived as a verdant park. With summer’s heat and humidity at bay, and with a prolonged drop in oil prices meaning less work and more play for some Houstonians, now is the time to go.

Friday

1 5 p.m. ­Look Up

The artist James Turrell’s “Sky Space” on the campus of Rice University is the perfect place to contemplate the heavens, framed with precision by a wafer-thin roof with a large aperturein the middle. Visitors sit in a pavilion below, looking up at the opening and marveling at Mr. Turrell’s deft manipulation of light as day turns to night in a Technicolor extravaganza that lastsroughly 45 minutes to an hour. “Sky Space” is open from 5:30 a.m. (for the sunrise light sequence) until 10 p.m. every day except Tuesdays. Reservations are free and typically required for the sunset light sequence only.

2 7 p.m.­ Greek Revival

Less than a year old and quickly becoming a popular standby in Rice Village, Helen has literally taken Greek food local with a menu that highlights regional produce given the Greek treatment. Huge Gulf shrimp “saganaki” ($18) are grilled and bathed in a peppery, fennel-spiked, fresh tomato sauce with feta and halloumi cheeses. Greek diner standards like the gyro ($20)are elevated with oven-roasted Texas pork, and delicate spanakopita ($3) are bursting with freshly sautéed spinach beneath a nearly transparent skin of crispy phyllo. Desserts are revelatory, from the delicate feta mousse with olive oil and thyme shortbread ($8) to the decadent Texas pecan baklava sundae ($7). The all-Greek wine list will open your eyes and your palate(not to mention your wallet) to the variety and quality of Greek tipples.

3 11 p.m. ­Choose Your Poison

Cactus or grapes? Step into one of Houston’s growing array of one-booze-only bars. Located downtown and serving more than 40 types of agave-based spirits, the Pastry War is all about the wonders of tequila and mezcal, from the house margarita ($8) to the evocatively trans-Atlantic-sounding Caravel, which features fig-and-cacao-infused mezcal, tawny port and Pedro Ximénez sherry. Around the corner is La Carafe, a timeworn ( it’s among the city’s oldest bars), wine-only joint that remains a perennial favorite.

Saturday

4 9 a.m. ­Breakfast Por Favor

Come with a newspaper and be prepared to stand in line at Laredo Taqueria, where the breakfast tacos ($2.25) run from egg and potato to chicharrón (pork skin). Start to burn some of those calories with a stroll through Buffalo Bayou Park, which has just emerged from a five-year overhaul and has running paths, bike trails and playgrounds.

5 10:30 a.m. ­A Fine Display

With a vast art collection and roster of special exhibitions that vividly reflect the city’s cultural mix and civic aspirations, the Museum of Fine Arts Houston (admission, $15) mixes prominent displays of Latin American, Islamic, Indian and Texan art in the mix with the ancient Greeks, Romans, European old masters and Impressionists and American modernists. There’s also a Noguchi-designed sculpture garden and one of the most cleverly curated museum shops in America. And since some Houston­ians don’t donate just their art but their homes as well, swing byone of the city’s most upscale enclaves, River Oaks, to visit themuseum’s collections of decorative arts in two gorgeous house museums — Rienzi ($6) and Bayou Bend ($12.50) —surrounded by acres of manicured gardens. Both homes will be on the wildly popular River Oaks Garden Club’s Azalea Trail weekend happening March 11 to 13 ($25).

6 2 p.m. ­Get Crabby

You might not get past the appetizers at Goode Co. Seafood, which feels like a laid-back beachtown diner with a train car stuck on the front of it. Among the starters, the standout dish (or rather glass, since it’s served in a tall sundae goblet) is the Campechana. Imagine zingy fresh tomato salsa — spicy but not hot enough to stop you from shoveling it into your mouth —laden with chunks of ripe avocado and succulent shrimp. Add fresh crab meat for the Campechana “Extra,” which is definitely worth the splurge at $16. Follow it up with a fried flounder po’ boy ($14) and a slice of margarita Key lime pie ($7) and roll back out to the sidewalk.

7 4 p.m. ­Style Mile

Houston is famously scattershot, with no single center of style gravity but rather little constellations of like-minded shops, cafes and restaurants sitting a few doors from one another. If you’re looking for sartorial inspiration, look no further than the stretch of Westheimer Road between West Avenue and River Oaks. For women’s clothing and accessories, start at Tootsies, a 35,000-foot “boutique” known for its take on major designer collections and customer service. Down the road are smaller and edgier shops, Laboratoria and Cakewalk, both specializing in niche brands and personalized styling. Men can work the other side of the street to find Billy Reid and see what new-school Southern gentry are wearing. A few blocks west, Sid Mashburn hawks his more polished and preppy togs in an upscale strip mall (not a pejorative term in Houston).

8 8:30 p.m. ­State of Grace

With Houston’s smart set table-hopping and air-kissing away, you’d never know that State of Grace’s see-and-be-seen dining room was formerly a dry cleaner and nail salon. Turns out the restaurateur Ford Fry, one of Atlanta’s culinary legends, is from Houston, and State of Grace, which opened in October, is his first venture in the old hometown. There’s a clubby dining room, a raw bar ringed by tables for two and a long bar for drinking or dining. The menu conveys Houston’s new eclecticism: lobster hush puppies ($9), queso Oaxaca ($12), Wagyu beef carpaccio ($9), pork schnitzel ($25) and roast duck carnitas for two ($52). Wash it all down with a bottle of Becker Texas viognier ($36). Linger after dinner for inventive cocktails like the Beast of Burden, made with ginger-spiced vodka and ginger beer or Bull in the Heather, blending Scotch, lavender honey and lemon bitters.

Sunday

9 10 a.m. ­Uncommon Baked Goods

Even on weekends there’s a morning rush hour and parking frenzy around Common Bond, the top-shelf bakery where breakfast options range from a bialy with cream cheese and caramelized onions ($3) to a tartine of duck breast, 63-degree egg, arugula and roasted peppers on rye ($11) or the more prosaic but savory soft scramble with herbs, Parmesan and ahunk of chewy baguette ($8). For dessert grab some house-made macarons in flavors like chocolate, lemon and lavender, or berries and cream ($2.25 each). Then step into Space Montrosenext door for a wide array of local and international handicrafts like Texas-made ceramic coasters ($10) or baby clothes (from $9) or a Texas-shaped Christmas ornament made from the state’s red-white-and-blue license plates ($15).

10 Noon ­Vintage Variety

If slightly older crafts are your thing, seek out the cluster of quirky antiques shops along Westheimer near Dunlavy. You could spend a good while picking your way though the tiny, jam-packed rooms at Old Blue House Antiques, which offers everything from chunky silver cuff bracelets to sleek Murano glass and even the odd 19th-century cabinet bronze tucked into an old nightstand. For furniture and larger pieces try Westheimer Flea Market, a large multivendor space where the inventory can vary wildly from week to week.

11 1:30 p.m. ­Arty Lunch

It’s about time refreshments were served on the Menil art campus — home of the renowned Menil Collection, Rothko Chapel, Cy Twombly Gallery and Dan Flavin Installation at Richmond Hall (all free) just west of Montrose. Set in a quaint little bungalow facing Renzo Piano’s masterful building for the Menil Collection, Bistro Menil opened a little over a year ago with a menu strong on savory nibbles like eggplant “fries” with anchovy aioli ($8), chicken and artichoke crepes ($13) or crab cakes ($26). Thus fortified you can head out to conquer all that art.



