Here are the news events that the search engine Baidu says most captured Internet users’ attention in 2015:

1. The Military Parade

The military parade in Beijing on Sept. 3 that commemorated the 70th anniversary of the end of World War II was the news event that users looked up the most on Baidu’s search platform. The celebration featured thousands of troops marching past President Xi Jinping and his predecessors, Hu Jintao and Jiang Zemin, as well as foreign leaders, including President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.

2. The Tianjin Explosions

A series of explosions on Aug. 12 that originated in a warehouse illegally storing hazardous chemicals in the port city of Tianjin killed 173 people, injured hundreds and left behind post-apocalyptic scenes of destruction. The blasts raised serious questions about the lax enforcement of safety regulations during China’s rapid industrialization.

3. The End of the One-Child Policy

In October, the government announced that it was ending the decades-old“one-child policy,” which restricted the number of children that married couples are allowed to have. The new regulations will not take effect until next year.

4. A Sex Video

In July, a video of a couple having sex in the fitting room of a Uniqlo clothing store in Beijing took the Internet in China by storm. Some commenters speculated that it was a publicity stunt by the retailer, which denied the claim. Several people were detained on suspicion of uploading and distributing the video.

5. Celebrity Mocks Mao

A video of Bi Fujian, a popular television host, poking fun at a song from a Cultural Revolution-era opera about the Chinese civil war, with his own critical asides about Mao and the Communist Party, appeared online in April. Despite the government’s efforts to contain its spread, it circulated widely, with some commenters defending Mr. Bi’s opinions and his right to express them.

6. The Stock Market Plunge

Over the summer, the bubble in the Chinese stock markets burst, wiping out trillions of dollars in valuation. Despite extensive efforts to contain the plunge, the Shanghai Composite Index had declined 43 percent on Aug. 26 since its peak on June 12.

7. The Renminbi’s Devaluation

In an effort to protect China’s role in the global economy as a manufacturing hub, the central bank devalued the currency in August, in the biggest drop in decades. Later in the year, after the International Monetary Fund added the renminbi to its group of global reserve currencies, the value of the currency fell further, possibly reflecting capital outflows.

8. A New iPhone

The release of Apple’s iPhone 6s and 6s Plus models in September led to record sales in China, which accounts for more than a fourth of the company’s operating income. Apple, whose products are often viewed as status symbols in China, is in competition not just with its South Korean archrival Samsung, but with the increasingly popular Chinese smartphone makers Huawei and Xiaomi.

9. The Discovery of a New Planet

NASA’s announcement of its discovery of an Earthlike planet in July captivated the Chinese imagination.

10. Fears of Another Tsunami

A powerful earthquake struck off Japan’s southern coast on May 30, prompting fears in China of a catastrophe similar to the tsunami and Fukushima nuclear power plant meltdown that followed the 2011 Japanese quake. In the end, no fatalities or major damage were reported.