The rites of summer are, by definition, fleeting: the summer romance, the summer job or vacation. Only the books seem to stick. Twelve writers recall their most memorable experiences of summer reading, proving perhaps that if you’re looking for an enduring summer romance, a good book might be your best bet.

Louise Erdrich

The public library in my hometown was a hushed haven cooled by slow-beating ceiling fans. Behind the high desk, a tall blond woman examined my card, but refused to stamp out the books I’d chosen."White Fang"was too violent for a 9-year-old. I came back with a note from my mother that said I could read anything I wanted. From then on I could range at will. With a worried expression the librarian allowed me to check out Leon Uris’s"Exodus."Next, nervously, she let me get away with"Ship of Fools."I had no idea what they were about. I just read them as collections of words.

And then I found “The Nylon Pirates,” by Nicholas Monsarrat. I thought it would be about pirates stealing women’s nylon stockings, which seemed shockingly tempting. It must have been the last straw, because the librarian refused to check it out for me. Instead, she gave me"Animal Farm.” “Let me know what you think,” she said. I loved it. “Well?” she said when I brought it back. “A great pig story!” I told her. She renewed the book with her special red stamp and handed it back to me. “Read it again,” she said.

Louise Erdrich’s most recent novel, “The Round House,” won the National Book Award last year.

Walter Isaacson

When I was growing up in New Orleans, my friend Thomas and I used to go fishing across Lake Pontchartrain. We’d stop for lunch at his uncle’s house on the Bogue Falaya, a lazy river teeming with turtles. I was baffled about what “Uncle Walker” did for a living, since he always seemed to be at home, sipping bourbon. He was a kindly gentleman, whose placid face seemed to know despair but whose eyes nevertheless often smiled. His daughter said he was a writer. One summer I read Walker Percy’s “The Moviegoer,” and it dawned on me that writing was something you could do for a living, just like being a doctor or a fisherman. The novel’s wry philosophical depth opened my eyes to what Percy called “the search,” poking around for clues about why we are here. At the end of that summer, I tried to get him to expound on the religious themes in the book, but he fended me off. “There are two types of people who come out of Louisiana,” he said. “Preachers and storytellers.” It was better to be a storyteller.

Walter Isaacson is the president of the Aspen Institute and the author of biographies of Steve Jobs, Albert Einstein and Benjamin Franklin.

Pico Iyer

I was just out of graduate school, the world was in front of me and I had nothing to do but roam around the Peloponnese for the"Let’s Go"guidebooks. Day after day, I’d wake up in a modest taverna, take a bus along the coast and wander through whitewashed villages, seeing sights for a living. I subsisted on Greek salads and Cokes and sported (like a sign of hoped-for wisdom) a beard.

Every day, talking to no one, encircled by the most elemental classical landscape I’d seen — all blue-and-white intensity — I’d page through the anguished dramas of Philip Carey and Mildred in Somerset Maugham’s"Of Human Bondage."For one not long out of British boarding-school, and hungry for a life of imagination, it became a near-scriptural text. When I looked up, I’d see blue water foaming around rocks, a lonely church amidst olive trees; when I looked down, Mildred was slashing through young Philip’s possessions with a carving knife.

In later years I’d reread the book and cherish, as ever, Maugham’s rare mix of society shrewdness and traveler’s openness. But then, my future as long as the horizons around me, his story held me like a warning and a bildungsroman at once. Books seldom so possess you as when you’re a kid, alone and eager for transformation. My summer in Greece became the summer of watching Philip Carey find — and lose — himself.

Pico Iyer’s most recent book is “The Man Within My Head.”

Alexander McCall Smith

One summer, over 20 years ago, my wife and I went to stay in a small cottage in France, on a farm in the Auvergne. Our children were small and needed an afternoon sleep, during which I sat on the veranda and readPatricia Highsmith novels, one after the other, and scared myself thoroughly. It started after I was a few chapters into"People Who Knock on the Door,” and by the time I had reached the end of"Deep Water,” I felt utterly uneasy.

It was ridiculous, of course; did I really need to look surreptitiously down the track that led to the house in case some passing stranger — a Highsmithian psychopath — might drop by? It was worse at night. The cottage had electricity, but only just. One could not leave the light on throughout the night, and the house was very isolated. The Auvergne in my mind now has a slightly sinister edge to it, and Tom Ripley, of course, lives in rural France; worth bearing in mind.

Alexander McCall Smith is the author of the “No. 1 Ladies’ Detective Agency” series.

Joy Williams

In the summer of my 13th year I read Thomas Wolfe’s “Look Homeward, Angel.” It seemed that only moments before, I was devouring Walter Farley’s books and writing love letters to a horse (I will have you. . . . I will . . . ), but this was my first discovery of a novel — big, poetic, strange, disorderly, “a story of the buried life,” as Wolfe described it. I later learned that many eminent critics felt it was not a novel at all. Wolfe was mocked for his lyricism and sprawl. Even my English teacher said that it was autobiography and was thus far easier to write than something of a creative nature. Her name has been forgotten, even by me, but “Look Homeward, Angel” remains, in its messy, keening, passionate, horribly comic and tragic way (Ben Gant’s death is one of the most moving in literature), ever memorable.

It is a young writer’s book — Wolfe was in his late 20s when it was published — and it is a marvelous book to read when one is young, lonely and unsure, desperate to become real and protect oneself from “school, society, all the barbarous invasions of the world.” It’s excessive, indulgent (originally he wanted to title it “O Lost!” or “Alone, Alone”), mythopoetic, a threnody of loss, defined and undefinable. It’s his best book, of course. He was on the verge of maturation, of summer, the season that eternally promises and confounds so much.

Joy Williams is the author of four novels, three collections of stories and a book of essays.

Ayana Mathis

I turned 16 in the summer of 1989. Philadelphia was pulling itself out of the hole into which it had fallen in the ‘70s and early ‘80s, but the city still had the air of both sinking ship and powder keg. In the high heat of the afternoons I would take two buses and the subway to meet friends in Center City. We wanted to be writers. We felt terrible about everything in our angsty teenage way. Our parents and our lives were complicated in ways we were too young to understand. We hung around one friend’s basement, reading and smoking and playing albums. We listened to “Visions of Johanna” so often I knew every scratch.

One afternoon I brought Sonia Sanchez’ “Under a Soprano Sky” with me. I had not intended to read aloud, but the poems got the best of me. After I’d read a few, we were quiet and astonished. Sanchez knew my yearning and my fears, and she was black like me and a woman like me. And she was a poet, which made me think I could be one too. I didn’t know how to articulate any of that, so I read the poems again, and then again. Summer blazed on, but my friends and I had each other, and our youth, and poems to say what we could not.

Ayana Mathis is the author of the novel “The Twelve Tribes of Hattie.”

Christopher Buckley

It was at a camp in Maine with the unimprovable name of Wild Goose. I was 12 years old and utterly miserable. I’d brought along my toy soldiers, and the other boys in Anaconda Cabin made merciless fun of me. Socially marooned, I discovered, for the first time, really, the escape of reading.

The book was a dog-eared paperback whose cover showed a forest penetrated by shafts of sunlight, and two Indians with mohawks walking along. It was a coming-of-age story of a boy torn between two worlds: he is kidnapped by the Delaware tribe as a child and returned to his parents as a teenager.

I would wake early and lie in my bed, devouring every word. I remember the smell of the piney woods outside the cabin and the sound of birds waking.

The book is “The Light in the Forest,” by Conrad Richter, first published in 1953, a year after I was born. I know nothing of Richter, but I will always be profoundly grateful to him for providing me with shelter that summer, and for showing me the way into, and out of, the forest.

Christopher Buckley’s book of essays, “But Enough About You,” is due to be published next year.

Junot Díaz

Junior year I spent my summer working at a steel mill. All my boys were taking it easy and my girl was down at the shore with her family, writing me sketchy letters about all the guys who were “into her.” She was at the beach, planning to leave me I was sure, and there I was wearing thermal greens and metatarsal boots five days a week. When we went into the melt shop I had to put on thermals under the greens to keep my inner organs from being cooked. What was even worse, though, were some of my co-workers. A couple of them tried to sell me paper targets with drawings of “blacks” on them. Their idea of a joke.

It was seriously a lousy job and an even lousier summer.

Still, you got to fight — so I fought. Every lunch break I sat on the deck overlooking the scrap yard and read me someToni Morrison. I’d brought all of her novels back from Rutgers, vowing to finish them all by summer’s end, and that’s exactly what I did. I read with a concentration I have never again matched. I’ll sure as hell never forget those lunch hours, turning those pages, the Komatsu loader cranking in the distance. I’ll never forget the books or all those heartbreaking lines. “How loose the silk. How jailed down the juice.” I’ll never forget having to close the books, all the strength that took and getting back to work.

I survived the summer. The girlfriend didn’t leave me. And Toni Morrison’s novels took hold of me the way books are wont to do when you’re a certain age. Took hold and never let go.

Junot Díaz’s novel, “The Brief Wondrous Life of Oscar Wao,” won the Pulitzer Prize in 2008. His most recent book is “This Is How You Lose Her.”

Jorie Graham

Early in the summer of 1963, in Rome, I finished supper and went into the empty living room with a new book. The glossy Gallimard cover of “Anna Karénine” in one hand, I arranged the pillows on the dark green velvet couch. Swallows cut their ellipses through the evening. Cicadas continued their strict stitching. Sounds in the house receded. The door stayed shut. I began to cross that other doorway, that frame filled with lines of black on white, and began to forget. My hands disappeared, my head, the room, the garden, its bursts of sparrows. . . .

“Anna was not in lilac, as Kitty had absolutely wanted, but in a low-cut black velvet dress. . . . Now she understood that Anna could not have been in lilac, that her loveliness consisted precisely in always standing out from what she wore, that what she wore was never seen on her. And the black dress with luxurious lace was not seen on her; it was just a frame, and only she was seen — ”

It was then, with the music of the waltz everywhere, and the words “Just then Vronsky approached,” that the strangeness began. I went blind. Or, rather, I looked up from the clear page into the deep black velvet, which had become the entire room. I tried to touch it, but my hands fluttered through. Where was I? Then there it was, the velvet — at my fingertips — the rim of the pillow. I was in the living room. I was at home. When I looked back to where the page had been, it was gone. Had I not looked away, would they not have vanished, the ballroom, the dancing, the danger, the absolute desire? Was this what Vronsky had seen — how the thing is everywhere and then it disappears? Then the door opened, and my mother was calling. “What are you doing here in the dark,” she said. “You’ll ruin your sight.” And the light came on. And there was the little paperback again, in my hands, weighing about as much as a hand.

Jorie Graham’s most recent book of poems is “Place.”

Chelsea Cain

In 1979, I got chloroformed and stuffed in a trunk for the first time at the Key West public library. Naturally, I kept going back. It was a pink palace with white shuttered windows — the perfect place to get bound and gagged and tossed on a ship. No one asked me where my parents were or why I spent five hours a day systematically going through the children’s mystery series section. On weekends, when the grown-ups were around, we went to the beach or out on the water. I found a lot of 20-dollar bills floating in the ocean in those days. I used to take the limp wet cash to the T-shirt shop on Duval Street, and they’d press it dry with their decal iron until it looked brand new. Twenties make excellent bookmarks. On Monday I’d be back at the library, another five books in my arms. I would read for hours, marking my favorite scenes with crisp 20s, before returning the books to the shelves. Funny, what we don’t question in childhood. It was many years later that I realized that my windfall of floating cash had not been lost by careless swimmers, but instead dumped by smugglers about to be boarded by the Coast Guard. By then it was too late. I had already filled the library’s collection of Nancy Drew books with drug money.

Chelsea Cain’s new thriller, “Let Me Go,” will be published in August.

Cheryl Strayed

I worked two full-time jobs the summer I was 15. One was granted me by a federal program for economically disadvantaged youth, doing cleanup and repairs at the school I attended; the other was at the Dairy Queen. Five days a week my two jobs bumped up against each other in a dawn-to-well-past-dusk 16‑hour stream, the graffiti-scrubbing and floor-polishing giving way to banana-split-making and cheerful cashiering. During every break, I had a book in my hands. The same one all summer long: Dalton Trumbo’s “Johnny Got His Gun.” Every unapologetic page felt to me like a shot to the head. Trumbo didn’t use a single comma. He didn’t capitalize “Christmas.” He conveyed everything I knew and didn’t yet know about the world without ever leaving the mind of a physically incapacitated man. I read it as I walked the half-mile from one job to the next. I read it while waiting for my ride in the late-night parking lot of the D.Q. Each time I finished the book I bawled my guts out and then turned to Page 1 and began reading again. It was as if Trumbo put me in a summerlong trance, only of the reverse sort — not the kind that puts you under, but rather the kind that wakes you up forever.

Cheryl Strayed’s books include “Wild” and “Tiny Beautiful Things.”

Jim Holt

It’s a roaring, squawking, howling cliché, but my most memorable summer-reading experience was getting through all of Proustwhile hitchhiking and Eurail-passing my way around Europe. It was the summer of 1976, and I was still in college. Flying on cheapo Icelandair, I landed in Luxembourg, thumbed my way to the Channel and eventually made my way to Oxford. There, at the heavenly Blackwell’s bookstore, I bought the entire Chatto & Windus edition of “Remembrance of Things Past” in the Scott Moncrieff translation. For the next two months, those 12 little yellow-and-blue volumes sustained, engrossed and frequently bored me in my trajectory through Britain, France, Austria and Italy. I sat chuckling in Paris’s Parc Monceau in the company of the incomparable Charlus; I endured the longueurs of the narrator’s obsession with Albertine, that “improbable jeune fille” with the “pasted-on bosom” (Nabokov), on an all-night train from Salzburg to Venice; I had a fake Proustian moment of mémoire involontaire on the Pont Neuf a couple of days before my flight back. Corny, but I miss the person I was then.

Jim Holt’s latest book is “Why Does the World Exist?”