On a late summer day, when the undulating lawns of Mauerpark play host to strolling tourists and local children chasing soccer balls, it is hard to believe that this place was ever the death strip, or no man’s land, running between heavily guarded sections of the Berlin Wall. There are reminders, of course. Portions of the wall remain, as do the foundations of houses abandoned in the zone between East and West.

But the city is as committed to progress as it is to preserving its history, something that can be seen not only in the vibrancy of the green space but also in a cluster of homes recently built at the Bernauer Strasse end of the park.

Designed by Helle Schröder and her colleagues Martin Janekovic and Uwe Rieger at the architecture firm XTH Berlin, the three adjoining houses were built on a privately owned site for which they were able to obtain a 199-year lease in 2006, for about $46,000.

“I liked the idea of living here because it was a chance to be part of the city’s recovery,” Ms. Schröder said. “The man who owns the land we eventually built on wanted to keep families in the city when the days of cheap housing were coming to an end, and more and more people were moving out. We went for one of the sites and found two other families who we could do the architecture for.”

Construction began two years later, and in 2012 Ms. Schröder and her two children moved into the house in the middle, a 2,475-square-foot home that cost about $566,000 to build.

Steel girders span the width of the house, allowing for a glass facade and an open interior space. “The house is all about space and light,” Ms. Schröder, 46, said. “I didn’t want any walls to get in the way, so the middle of the house is completely free.”

Standing at the rear patio door, where a whitewashed pine staircase ascends from the ground-floor storage area to the living space above, a visitor can see straight up to the top floor. With its movable ramps and voids, its protective railing and netting, the house feels a bit like a minimalist puzzle or an Escher drawing.

“The idea is to be able to see to the top of the house from the storage room, so we cut the floor out here,” Ms. Schröder explained. “The net is a safety feature, but also a bit of fun. The kids often lie on it. The rail is just another feature to break your fall if you slip down the stairs.”

A small landing just below the top floor that looks out over the Prenzlauer Berg district is what the family calls “the tourist-viewing platform.” From there, and from the terrace above, Ms. Schröder; her son, Dan, 11; and her daughter, Liva, 13, have an ideal vantage point for watching the city grow.

“I think a lot about what this area represents,” Ms. Schröder said. “Every day I look out on the foundations of a house from which people jumped from the windows to escape to the West. The paving stones my kids run over in front of our house map the route of the tunnels that were dug by people desperate to leave the G.D.R. It is living history for me.”