HONG KONG — Of all the priceless Chinese antiques at the new Liang Yi Museum here, only one is ringed off with a security rope: a fragile shrine said to be one of the most important from the Emperor Qianlong’s 18th-century reign.

Peter Fung, the Hong Kong tycoon who created the museum from his personal collection, was explaining the shrine’s significance during a recent tour when his hip brushed the elastic barrier, causing it to snap open with a clatter. The guests in attendance gasped. But Mr. Fung, a trim figure with cropped grey hair and rimless glasses, seemed unperturbed.

“The inscription on the back is in Tibetan, Manchurian, Mongolian and Chinese,” he continued, pointing to four columns of hand-carved text. “It says it was made in the 34th year of Qianlong’s rule.”

“Zitan wood,” Mr. Fung added, as his listeners caught their breath. “Lifted from the Palace by another emperor.”

The Liang Yi is an oddity in a city with almost no private museums. Opened to the public in March, it is the work of an eccentric millionaire so particular in his collecting tastes that he has been known to chase a single chair through the antique market for years, just so it could be rejoined with its matching partner.

The Liang Yi, named after Mr. Fung’s two daughters, has a narrow focus. Its minimalist white space showcases works from two dynasties, the Ming and Qing, made from two types of precious wood: huanghuali, or yellow flowering pear, often marked by its amber swirls, and zitan, a member of the rosewood family, known for its density and near-black sheen.

Also on exhibit is one of the world’s finest collections of jeweled miniature vanity cases, created from diamonds, onyx and jade — another particular interest of Mr. Fung’s.

The museum takes up the upper three floors of a renovated 1960s building on Hollywood Road, known as Hong Kong’s “Antique Row.” But Mr. Fung kept the ground floor as it was, with the usual small antique shops. To visit the Liang Yi, one must book in advance, ring a doorbell on the side of those shops and be shown upstairs.

“The entrance was left deliberately modest,” Mr. Fung said. “It’s not going to attract thousands.”

Andy Hei, whose family has been in the Chinese furniture business for generations, and who runs a gallery on the same strip as the Liang Yi, said the museum had “one of the best collections in Hong Kong.”

“This is a landmark for Antique Row. It’s symbolic,” Mr. Hei said. “It’s rare to have someone of Mr. Fung’s experience. And it’s impressive that he created a museum basically on his own.”

Antique Row is quickly changing, as the neighboring area of Soho gentrifies and high-end restaurants and bars drive up rents, pushing out traditional antique dealers. China’s rapid modernization, and the rise of moneyed Asian collectors, mean that the finest antiques are now much more expensive and harder to find.

Mr. Hei, who also runs the Fine Art Asia fair in Hong Kong, said the market had changed entirely.

“Mr. Fung bought early, in the ’80s, when you could still choose from the best of these two dynasties,” Mr. Hei said. “In the old days, we would just go to China and count up the antiques. Now, you really have to look for good pieces,” he added. “I honestly don’t know if one individual could amass such a collection today.”

The Liang Yi enforces strict crowd control for two reasons: Visitors can get up close to the works; and they also get a detailed explanation from a tour guide of a subtle collection whose value would not be immediately obvious to anyone but experts.

“Most of it would escape the uninitiated — and I’m not being necessarily derogatory,” Mr. Fung said.

“This unassuming thing. What do you think it is?” he asked, pointing to a low, heavy, square piece. “When I bought it, people told me I’d been cheated — that it was just a standard bed. But we guess it’s a ceremonial platform. You can see the demons carved into the corners and the Buddhist reverse swastikas woven on top.”

He slowly went through each of his invaluable oddities: an unusually large altar table, a heavy chair, an elaborate Ming screen that is the “oldest of its kind.” He seemed almost oblivious of his tour group as he became immersed in details such as whether a corner was convex or concave.

“In the old days, a carpenter worked his whole life for one master, which is why each piece is unique,” he said. “Look at this five-sided table. It’s very unusual for Chinese design. Maybe it was for a man with four mistresses, God bless him,” he said with a laugh.

For all the care he takes in preservation, Mr. Fung is not a purist. Chinese artisans fixed and repainted works through the centuries — and he does, too.

At the end of the tour were beautiful huanghuali screens. “The original restorers did a lousy job,” Mr. Fung said. So he commissioned a Hong Kong jewelry designer, Wallace Chan, to repaint them. The resulting floral inlays, in bright oranges and greens, are obviously modern but oddly suitable on the ancient wood.