JIANLI, China — Zhu Hongmei, 65, had somehow managed to work her way into an air pocket in the capsized cruise ship. She stayed there for 15 or so hours, despite the cold and the currents and the darkness.

She kept her head above water. She did not lose consciousness. And on Tuesday, a rescue diver appeared with scuba equipment to guide her, after just five minutes of instruction, through the murky waters and out of the Yangtze River, back into the light.

The account of that rescue, given during a televised briefing byChen Shoumin, the commander of the local military district in this remote part of central China, was one of the few moments of triumph after a nautical disaster likely to rate as one of the worst in recent memory.

Beneath a shroud of gray clouds, the air sticky with early summer humidity, divers put on their suits and went one after the other into the waters of the world’s third-longest river, hoping to find at least one of the hundreds of missing passengers, many of them retirees, from the Oriental Star. The ship keeled over Monday night in severe weather that the captain and engineer described to investigators as a tornado, state news media reports said.

Besides Ms. Zhu, two others were pulled from the water on Tuesday, the Chinese state news media reported. One was Chen Shuhan, a 21-year-old crew member.

The diver who found him, Guan Dong, told a television reporterthat he searched three times in the 251-foot-long, four-story ship, which had come to rest upside down, before finding the crewman. “Once I dove in, I found him stuck inside,” Mr. Guan said. “It was completely dark, and he was alone.”

As of midday Wednesday, with heavy rain falling, only 14 people were known to have survived the accident; 430 others who had been aboard the Oriental Star were unaccounted for.

Twelve people had been confirmed dead, according to the official Xinhua news agency, and many hundreds were probably still inside the vessel. Mr. Chen, the military commander, said that more people might still be alive in the ship and that additional rescuers were on their way to the scene, in Jianli County of Hubei Province.

In addition to the divers, other rescue workers were seen on state television tapping hammers on the hull, then listening for any response that could indicate there were more survivors.

It appeared that the death toll could exceed that in East Asia’s last major such disaster, the sinking of the South Korean ferry Sewol ln April 2014, in which 304 people were killed, most of them high school students.

The captain of the ship, who has not been identified in state media, was recovered from the river at about 11:50 p.m. Monday, more than two hours after the vessel capsized, the official Hubei Daily reported.

Images released Tuesday afternoon by the Chinese state media showed boats swarming around the capsized vessel and rescue workers on the keel, which lay above the waterline in muddy water, perpendicular to the riverbank. Xinhua reported that rescuers had cut into the ship in an attempt to reach possible survivors. As night fell, the scene was illuminated by powerful lights.

Alan Loynd, a longtime salvage expert based in Hong Kong, said that cutting a hole into the hull would require making sure the ship was in shallow water, to ensure it does not sink deeper. “The danger, of course, is if she’s floating upside down, you let the air out and she sinks,” he said. “You’d probably want to tow her into the shallows.”

When possible, air is pumped into an overturned vessel from below as the exposed hull is cut open, in an attempt to maintain air pockets in the hull and reduce the risk that the vessel will descend deeper even if it has been dragged into shallow water. “One problem with pumping air from underneath is affecting the vessel’s stability — it may roll further,” said Arthur Bowring, the managing director of the Hong Kong Shipowners Association.

Cutting through the hull with an oxy-acetylene torch is also difficult because it involves not just slicing through thick steel plates. A cutting crew may need to slice through beams and other reinforcement connected to the inside of the steel plates, Mr. Loynd said.

Many of the passengers who boarded the vessel in Nanjing on Thursday for a trip to last 10 days or more were older people on group tours, although there were also children among the passengers, including one 3 years old.

Some anxious relatives of the passengers said they had been kept in the dark throughout the ordeal.

In Shanghai, many of the tourists had booked through the Xiehe Tourism Agency. On Tuesday afternoon, the agency’s offices there were closed, with a note taped to the door saying that the managers had gone to the site of the accident.

Grieving family members who had shown up at the office were sent by officials to a local petition bureau, about half a mile away, and told to wait there. At the bureau, dozens of relatives of passengers were inside the waiting rooms, many of them angry that the government had not provided them with any information about the accident or a list of possible victims.

“They don’t want to tell us anything, and they treat us like we’re going to do something bad,” said a woman with the surname Chen, who said three of her sisters and two brothers-in-law were believed to have been on the Oriental Star with 14 other members of a tour group. “We just want to know where they are. Our family lost five people.”

Ms. Chen’s husband, who said his name was Mr. Cai, stepped in, saying: “No one has talked to us; we’ve gotten no update. It’s really disappointing.”

When a man who appeared to be a higher-ranking official arrived at the bureau, some relatives shouted at him and followed him, demanding answers. Others jostled with staff members at the bureau after they were told not to talk with the news media.

In an indication of how seriously the ruling Communist Party regarded the accident, Premier Li Keqiang arrived at the scene of the rescue efforts on Tuesday, Xinhua reported. News organizations reported that Xi Jinping, the country’s president and the party’s leader, had “issued important instructions immediately” to direct rescue operations.

In the main Jianli hospital, several police officers blocked journalists on Tuesday evening from going to the rooms in which survivors were resting. One officer said survivors had been brought in with multiple fractures. The hospital will send a psychologist to talk to the survivors, he said. Earlier, Premier Li Keqiang had visited the survivors.

The central government ordered all Chinese journalists, except for those from Xinhua and China Central Television, to refrain from going to the scene, some Chinese journalists said. The government often issues such orders when unexpected and politically delicate news events take place.

Both the captain and the chief engineer of the Oriental Star, who also survived, were taken into police custody and said during questioning that the ship capsized when it was hit by a tornado, according to reports in the state-run media.

The sinking is the most prominent transportation accident in China since a high-speed train crash near the eastern city of Wenzhou in 2011, in which 40 people died.

Tornadoes are not as common in China as in the United States, but the China Meteorological Administration said Tuesday that a tornado had been reported in the area around the time that the ship capsized. Wind speeds reached 12 on the Beaufort Scale, which translates to 74 miles per hour, or hurricane strength, for 15 to 20 minutes, the administration said in an emailed response to questions. Between 9 p.m. and 10 p.m. on Monday, about two and a half inches of rain fell in the area, it said.

Local people described violent weather on Monday night. Qin Jianli, 48, from the nearby village of Xinzhou, said: “Last night around 9:30, the wind began blowing hard, with lots of lightning. It blew so hard it destroyed some homes in my village. The wind swirled in a twisting shape.”

Yang Min, who was waiting in Shanghai on Tuesday for news about his 60-year-old parents and his 7-year-old daughter, all of whom had been on the ship, said he had called them about 9 p.m. Monday, just minutes before the vessel was reported to have sunk. “They said it was raining, but they didn’t say the weather was too bad,” Mr. Yang said by telephone.

But Zhang Hui, a 43-year-old tour company employee who survived the disaster, told Xinhua that the ship encountered strong winds and lightning shortly after 9 p.m. “Raindrops hit the right side of the ship, and many cabins had water come in,” he said. “Even with the windows closed the water seeped in.”

Twenty minutes later, as passengers were busy dragging wet bedding and electrical devices from their berths, the ship tilted violently. “We’ve got a big problem,” he said he told a colleague. Mr. Zhang said that he could not swim but that he grabbed a life vest that kept him afloat as wave after wave crashed over him. “I told myself, ‘Just keep going,’” he said.

Satellite data on a Chinese website under the Ministry of Transportation showed that the Oriental Star made a sharp change in direction during its final minutes afloat, going downstream rather than upstream for more than five minutes. It traveled about 1,300 feet, or more than five times the length of the ship, before the last fix on the ship’s position was recorded by the website.

The data only plotted the ship’s position. It was not clear whether the ship actually turned around on its own power or drifted downstream with the current before losing contact with the satellite.

Alex Moran, 49, an American who worked for several years on ships on the Yangtze as a cruise director, said captains on the river had wide discretion on when and where to stop.

“The only reason you sail through a storm is because you have to, or really want to,” Mr. Moran wrote in an email from the Philippines, where he now lives. “I was always fighting with my captains and crews about this. I want the sailing schedule that is best for my guests. The captain wants what’s best for him and/or the crew, and he has the keys.”

Tuesday night, police officers had set up a checkpoint on the main road leading into the town of Jianli, the county seat. Many local residents stood holding umbrellas while various rescue and civilian vehicles remained parked in the vicinity or waited in line at the checkpoint. Another road branched down toward the main rescue site on the banks of the Yangtze.

Men in green fatigues walked around, and ambulances with flashing lights drove both ways along the road. One white tanker from Sinopec, the large state oil company, sat on the side of the wet road. It had been appointed to provide fuel for rescue vehicles. Minibuses from the Civil Affairs Bureau were parked on one side of the road, across from the tanker; they had been used to bring rescue workers to the scene.

The ship was built in February 1994 and was capable of carrying 534 people, Xinhua reported. It belongs to the Chongqing Oriental Ferry Company, which is state-owned and deeply in debt. Last year the company reported assets of about $14.5 million and liabilities of more than twice that amount, or $29.8 million, according to records filed with the government.

On Tuesday, Xinhua lowered the number of people onboard at the time of the capsizing to 456 from 458. The agency did not explain the change.