In the hottest days of summer, the heat sends funk rising from the neighborhood fish markets, and directly overhead, in plain view, the subways rattle over the Manhattan Bridge every few minutes. Location, location, location, the real estate adage goes. But Mr. Fong’s, a new bar at the forlorn corner of Market and Madison Streets in Chinatown, is packed every night, from 10 p.m. until it closes at 4.

The owners are striving to make it a neighborhood joint, but so far, it’s the fashion industry that has made it a destination. On any given night, a conclave of young Vogue editors may be holed up in one of the sparse few booths, a powerful stylist swaying to the vinyl-only D.J. set or any number of models toasting any number of other models. (It is a popular birthday destination, provided the birthday you are celebrating is somewhere below 30.)

On Tuesday, Matthew Foley, a former associate of Thom Browne, was there with his boyfriend and boyfriend’s twin sister, and not for the last time. “We’re going for their birthday on Saturday,” he said. “It’s the thing to do.” (It is even the thing to do if you don’t drink; Mr. Foley doesn’t.)

What draws the crowds? Mr. Fong’s isn’t glitzy or snobby. “Just a cool bar in the middle of nowhere,” said the model Janice Alida, who called in from a shoot in Montauk to rave. It is mostly absent the undesirable bro contingent choking Lower East Side bars, even without any official door policy.

“This weird jaunt, through alleyways that are rat-filled and streets that are only one block long, might be a good filter for that sort of clientele,” said Lucas Moran, 41, one of the owning partners.

The room is dark and handsome, and the drinks cheap (no beer more than $7, and the $9 house vodka tonic is infused with Chinese celery and herbs, in a nod to the neighborhood). But the secret to Mr. Fong’s success probably isn’t the cocktails any more than it is the convenient proximity to the First Chinese Presbyterian Church. It’s the seven-man synod of owners’ deep roots in several industries, including fashion, hospitality and Hollywood — six identifiable, one a press-shy rock star — whose wide reach seems to summon the throngs.

“I ask everyone how they got here,” said Emerson Barth, an agent at IMG Models, who lives next door, “and it’s always, ‘I’m a friend of a friend of a friend of the owners.’ ”

Mr. Moran’s partners include Noah Shelley, 35, an owner and partner of AM Casting, an agency that connects labels like Rick Owens, Opening Ceremony and Ann Demeulemeester with models.

Then there is Aisa Blue Shelley, 33, Mr. Shelley’s brother, and like Mr. Moran an alumnus of the Brooklyn restaurant Rucola; Adam Moonves, 31, a Los Angeles transplant whose sister, Sara, is a contributing fashion editor at Vogue; Jordan Hadley, 41; and Daniel Eric Gold, 39, an actor whose face is recognizable from his stint as Betty’s sometime suitor on “Ugly Betty.”

The bar has no P.R. strategy, no sign and no more marketing than a bare-bones Instagram account, but between the seven, they’ve coaxed out a crowd that also includes skateboarders, locals from the nearby Knickerbocker Village houses and cops, or at least those who play them on TV.

“Walking through fish smells and then to come to a place like this — it’s an oasis,” said Peter Scanavino, a friend of Mr. Gold’s who plays a detective on “Law & Order: SVU.”

You will not find the titular Mr. Fong himself, though he is a real person, a local Chinatown real estate manager and power broker. “Half the people I’ve ever met, they’re like: ‘Named after the Mr. Fong? He got me my first apartment in ’98,’ ” Noah Shelley said. After he found the owners the space, they gratefully named it after him.

Two years ago, the Shelley brothers had planned another bar, in Brooklyn, which foundered.

“Thank God,” Mr. Shelley said. “It was in Fort Greene. It would have been a freaking stroller bar.”