Given the popularity of giant pandas as attractions both in China and in zoos around the world, it is easy to forget that they still face mortal threats.

That fact was made clear this week when forestry officers in southwestern China revealed that they had arrested two brothers for killing one of the endangered animals, then trying to sell its meat and fur. A third man was arrested for purchasing panda meat, along with seven others who were implicated in trafficking parts of the protected animal, according to reports in the Chinese state-run news media.

The panda was reportedly killed in December by two brothers, surnamed Wang, in Yunnan Province. One of their sheep had been attacked and, with the help of a dog, they followed animal tracks leading from the sheep pen into woods, according to the China News Service.

The brothers told State Forestry Administration officers that they shot an unidentified animal in a tree, and only after it was dead discovered it was an adult female panda, the China News Service reported. Afterward, the men butchered the animal and began to try to sell its parts. They offered nearly 80 pounds of meat and four paws for 4,800 renminbi, or about $785. They found buyers for the meat and other parts in Yunnan and neighboring Sichuan Province, forestry officers told the state media. Investigators discovered about 20 pounds of panda meat in a freezer in Yunnan, and also found the animal’s hide, several bones and its gallbladder.

Although pandas are a national symbol of China and one of the country’s most beloved animals, they were nearly wiped out by habitat destruction and poaching until preservation efforts began in the second half of the 20th century. China’s most recent survey of wild pandas, which began in 2011, found 1,864 of the animals living in the wild, an increase of 16.8 percent from the previous survey, in 2003, the WWF said in February. In addition, more than 300 pandas live in captivity.

While the killing of the Yunnan panda is a blow to preservation efforts, it also reveals how the growing population is expanding its range. Although pandas were once found as far south as the northernmost parts of Vietnam and Myanmar, their modern range was thought to be restricted to a few mountainous areas of the Chinese provinces of Sichuan, Shaanxi and Gansu. The Yunnan poaching case led officials to invite experts from the Chinese Academy of Sciences and the State Forestry Administration to investigate. They found signs of pandas living in northern Yunnan but said that further investigation was needed into whether they had spread from Sichuan or had been living undiscovered in Yunnan for generations, the China News Service reported.