BEIJING—He lost out in the competition for the top job in China, but Li Keqiang will step into the secondary role of prime minister bearing the hopes of some of the more reform-minded members of his generation.

Arguably China’s best educated leader, Mr. Li speaks confident English. In contrast to the previous round of Chinese leaders who were steeped in leaden party doctrine and Soviet economic theory, Mr. Li has been exposed to a rich palate of liberal thinking. Like his predecessor Wen Jiabao, he often displays a common touch with ordinary Chinese.

But Mr. Li, 57, will be hemmed in by the stability-obsessed conservatives who will dominate the seven-seat Politburo Standing Committee slated to effectively run China for the next five years.  As one of only two members who owe their positions to Hu Jintao, the outgoing president who groomed him for power, he may find himself outgunned by those allied to Jiang Zemin, the 86-year-old former president and kingmaker.

And after rising from a modest background through the Communist Party political machine, he faces a panoply of “princelings” descended from revolutionary luminaries, many of them inclined to protect the state-owned businesses that have generated enormous wealth for their friends and relatives.

Those who know Mr. Li say he was profoundly shaped by his years at Peking University, one of the nation’s preeminent schools with a long tradition of liberal teaching. Like other traumatized young Chinese whose best years were stolen by the madness of Mao Zedong’s Cultural Revolution, Mr. Li arrived there in 1978 with a thirst for Western ideas and a curiosity about individual rights, market economics and democracy.

At night, after the university had shut off the dorm lights, he and his classmates would gather under street lamps to debate the merits of constitutional law and the downsides of continuous class struggle. Some of his friends would later end up in jail for their role in the 1989 student protests in Tiananmen Square.

“Like all of us back then, Li Keqiang was idealistic, open-minded, incisive and eager to see China change,” said Wang Juntao, who was also among the first batch of students to return to campus through competitive exams after the decade of chaos ended with Mao’s death in 1976.

After their lost decade, the students — whose ages ranged from late teens to early 30s — threw themselves into their studies with zeal.  “We were so thirsty to learn that we spent all our time in the classrooms or the library,” said Tao Jingzhou, who, along with Mr. Li, was one of 81 students assigned to the school’s law department.

Despite an unremarkable run at the helm of two provinces and a reputation as a deferential party loyalist, some of Mr. Li’s former classmates hold out hope that he might help nudge China’s opaque, authoritarian system toward greater openness. Others, citing his doctorate in economics, say at the very least he could become a forceful advocate for loosening the grip of the state-run conglomerates that many analysts say are smothering entrepreneurs and endangering China’s economic miracle.

“We all have a hope that he hasn’t abandoned the beliefs of his youth,” said Chen Zimin, a political commentator who was active in the experimental student elections in 1980 that Mr. Li supported. “Perhaps we were hoping for too much.”

Indeed, today it can be hard to spot traces of the young idealistic man who once translated “The Due Process of Law,” the iconic  treatise by famed British jurist Lord Denning. As many of his classmates went abroad to continue their studies or joined the ill-fated democracy movement that was crushed by the military, Mr. Li cast his lot with the Communist Party bureaucracy and later hitched his star to Mr. Hu.

When the opportunity came for further study in the United States, he was persuaded by party officials to stay in China and devote himself to the Communist Youth League, the cadre training organization whose membership was largely drawn from those with humble pedigrees. Years later, when friends threw themselves into the protests that swamped Tiananmen Square, Mr. Li, in his role as league secretary, pleaded with them to return to campus, according to the memoirs of several participants.

But his liberal education has not entirely gone to waste. On economic matters, he has demonstrated a keen understanding of complex theory; more recently, he has been a vocal advocate for economic restructuring and the importance of a level playing field for private business. He was the primary sponsor of a World Bank report issued in February that warned of crisis if China failed to break the stranglehold of its giant state-run enterprises.

In April, he veered off his prepared remarks at an international economic forum to urge greater transparency and an unimpeachable legal system. He has also displayed flashes of pragmatism: according to a cable published by Wikileaks, Mr. Li confided to the American ambassador that he considered China’s economic figures unreliable and “for reference only.”

But many analysts say these qualities pale in comparison to what may be the greatest gift to his career: his long alliance with the status quo-minded Mr. Hu. Since the two first met in the early 1980s, Mr. Hu has ensured his protégé’s rise through the party bureaucracy, starting with influential posts in the youth league. Some analysts, noting their placid demeanors and deep connections to hardscrabble Anhui, have disparagingly described the two men as “carbon copies.”

In 1998, when he was 42, Mr. Li was dispatched to Henan, a poor, tough-to-govern province in China’s midsection, becoming the nation’s youngest governor, and later the province’s more powerful party secretary.

His six years in Henan were not known for excellence. A series of deadly fires that claimed hundreds of lives in a factory, a cinema and a nightclub earned him the nickname “Three Fires Li.” But he was more seriously bruised by a blood contamination scandal that infected hundreds of thousands of peasants with HIV after they sold their plasma through state-affiliated clinics. Although the infections began before his arrival in Henan, public health advocates say Mr. Li was more interested in covering up the unfolding crisis than arresting the contamination or tracking down those responsible for slipshod blood-collection methods.

“In my opinion, Li Keqiang should be sentenced to life in prison for official misconduct,” said Wan Yanhai, the director of the AIDS group Aizhixing, who fled China for the United States in 2010 to escape what he says was ongoing government harassment. “When hundreds of people were dying, he was more concerned about his political career. So he kept quiet.”

In 2004, Mr. Li was made party chief of Liaoning, a rustbelt province in China’s northeast where the restructuring of obsolete state-run industries had produced mass unemployment. Armed with $8 billion from the State Development Bank, he replaced huge tracts of slums with housing for more than a million people. By the time he was summoned back to Beijing in 2007, economic growth in Liaoning was healthy if unremarkable.

As first ranked vice premier in charge of economic development, food safety and health care, Mr. Li has overseen an ambitious expansion of the nation’s medical insurance program. But his other signature project — a social housing program that seeks to build 36 million low-cost apartments by 2015 — has been criticized by some for poor planning and shoddy construction.

Some analysts say Mr. Li’s commitment to the commonweal has been tested by his brother’s role as the top official in China’s State Tobacco Monopoly Administration. The agency sells 2.3 trillion cigarettes a year, bringing in roughly $100 billion — between 7 and 10 percent of the government’s annual revenue, according to a study published last month by the Brookings Institute.

Given the central government’s stated goal of reducing smoking, the report called on Mr. Li’s brother to step down from his job. “Paradoxically, Li’s personal/family ties to the tobacco industry might have prevented him from making a real effort to constrain cigarette production and consumption in the country,” the report said.

The optimists — and there are precious few these days — say Mr. Li may just be waiting for the right opportunity to reveal his true political stripes. “He may be a bit naïve, but I think he’s sincerely honest,’’ said his former classmate Mr. Wang, who was jailed for more than four years after the government branded him a “black hand” behind the 1989 protests. “I still believe that he has a bottom line.”

But one former official turned businessman thought it would probably take a crisis to compel  Mr. Li and other top leaders to embrace a substantial loosening of political and economic controls.

“I think in the end, events will force them to change, even if they don’t want to,” the business executive said. “Smart leaders will reform because they want to, idiots will reform because they have to.”