MELBOURNE, Australia — The Li Na experience continued Thursday afternoon in what was billed as a news conference but came across more like a one-woman show. Li alternated between funny, introspective, philosophical and bemused.

She told jokes, like one quip about her hometown in China: “Not so many people. Just like 10 million.” She talked honestly about luck and fame. She said she wanted to be a housewife in retirement. And she listed one of her goals in this Australian Open: to not fall down.

A similar Li Na experience had played out earlier Thursday, on court in the semifinals, and it unfolded with similar levels of ease (lots) and tension (little). Li needed all of 86 minutes to dismiss Eugenie Bouchard, 6-2, 6-4, and secure her spot in Saturday’s final. She smacked 35 winners. She won 82 percent of Bouchard’s second serves.

For a tournament marked by upsets, by dramatic swings in fortune and weather, the women’s semifinals landed Thursday with a thud. Gone were the expected contenders, such as Serena Williams, Victoria Azarenka and Maria Sharapova. Gone, too, was the excitement.

In their place stood a global line-up of players from China (Li), Canada (Bouchard), Slovakia (Dominika Cibulkova) and Poland (Agnieszka Radwanska). Tennis insiders billed these matchups as potentially more intriguing, the thought being that what they lacked in star power they would make up for in style contrasts, in young (Bouchard) versus older (Li) and in power (Cibulkova) against panache (Radwanska).

So much for that sentiment. Just as Li overpowered Bouchard, Cibulkova deconstructed Radwanska, the match over, 6-1, 6-2, before the assembled crowd could settle in. Radwanska had played her quarterfinal the day before (as had Cibulkova) but had also endured three matches that lasted more than two hours in this tournament.

“I feel like in slow motion today,” Radwanska said.

By the time the women’s semifinals started Thursday, the fourth seed, Li, had become the favorite. That was not necessarily a good thing at this Australian Open, given the fates of the other top players, Novak Djokovic and Andy Murray included.

On one hand, Li was the only Grand Slam champion left in the women’s bracket. She won the French Open in 2011. On the other, she had reached the final here in 2011 and 2013, won the first set in each of those matches and faltered twice, against Kim Clijsters and Azarenka. In those instances, she shed more than a few tears.

In Li’s way this time stood Bouchard, a tournament darling, a 19-year-old Canadian with her own Australian cheering section (Genie’s Army) and a Twitter post on Thursday from Justin Bieber that read simply, “good luck :).” Not only was Bouchard the WTA newcomer of the year in 2013, but she also played here not like an awe-struck teenager but like the future of women’s tennis.

Li squashed any Bouchard aspirations early. She won 20 of the first 23 points, won each of the first five games and won enough when Bouchard upped her aggression in the second set to end it there. Even Biebs would have been impressed.

It was fair, afterward, to wonder if all the attention her run to the semifinal garnered had too great an impact on Bouchard. Li had been here, this close to a final, in a contest of this magnitude before. Bouchard had not.

Afterward, Bouchard carried another stuffed animal given by her army, an emu this time named Sheila. She agreed in part that nerves had factored into her defeat. But so, of course, did Li.

On match point, Bouchard clipped the net with one shot that bounced over and landed on the sideline. “This one,” Li said she thought as she ran toward the ball, is the “more important one.” She reached it and rocketed a backhand cross-court winner for game, set, match.

“I feel like she didn’t give me much breathing space, much room to do what I wanted to do,” Bouchard said. “She played too good almost.”

In her on-court interview, Li waved at Genie’s Army, the group of young Australians who had adopted Bouchard over these last two weeks. “Sorry about that,” Li said.

Cibulkova needed even less time to become the first woman from Slovakia to advance to a Grand Slam final. Her Open was filled with similar matches; with short, dominant sets; with only one three-set victory, against Sharapova in the fourth round. In her five previous Grand Slam tournaments, Cibulkova had won six matches, a total she equaled Thursday in this tournament alone.

Li will be favored in the final, but she has not been infallible here. She nearly tripped in the third round, down match point to Lucie Safarova. Li saved that point and played calmer the rest of the way. In her next two matches, she dropped a total of six games.

In the interview room afterward, Li said (again) she considered retirement at Wimbledon last year, until her coach, Carlos Rodriguez, talked her out of it. She responded to a question about whether it gave her satisfaction to be considered perhaps the most popular and acclaimed Asian tennis player of all time with an, “Of course. Everybody wants to be famous.”

She detailed visualization techniques and boot camps and her decision to leave China’s national program early in her career. She sat in a familiar position, in the Australian Open women’s final on Saturday, and in an unfamiliar one, as the favorite.

In last year’s final, she fell down twice. That seemed to stick with her, the embarrassment of the moment, and she mentioned those incidents repeatedly all week.

“Life always have a challenge,” she concluded. “You just have to face it.”