The new documentary “People’s Park“ surveys the range of human activity in a bustling urban park in Chengdu, China. People stroll, snack, socialize, practice calligraphy and engage in a wide variety of song and dance, from Chinese opera to pulsing disco. Some ignore the camera; others play to it. The filmmakers, Libbie Dina Cohn and J. P. Sniadecki, are never seen, but their presence is felt, not least because of how they chose to portray the park’s myriad denizens and activities: as a literal panorama of leisure and revelry, filmed in one long tracking shot.

Mr. Sniadecki, a doctoral candidate in anthropology at Harvard, visited People’s Park in 2007, while shooting a documentary about migrant labor. When he returned with Ms. Cohn, then a student at Yale, in 2011, they envisioned a more conventional film, with cuts among various subjects. But they soon realized the advantages of a single-shot approach.

“There was a kind of sensorial and architectural desire to capture the place as a whole, to give the viewer an immersive experience of taking it in all in one go,” Mr. Sniadecki said in a recent interview.

For much of the history of cinema, feature-length single-shot movies were but an elusive dream given the limited capacity of film cameras, which typically hold only 1,000 feet of film, or about 10 minutes of footage. Alfred Hitchcock’s 1948 “Rope” is the best-known early attempt to realize — or, rather, simulate — this fantasy. Premised on the illusion of continuity, the movie is composed of 11 shots, joined with sneaky camera movements and hidden edits.

The refusal to cut is an impulse as old as the movies, inseparable from the appetite for the real that is hard-wired into the medium. The brief actuality films of the Lumière brothers were the one-shot wonders of their day, unedited glimpses of the world as it was. In 1946 the French critic André Bazin described the history of film as a movement toward “a total and complete representation of reality,” which he acknowledged as an unattainable ideal, the basis of a “myth of total cinema.”

Since the days of Bazin, who prized the uninterrupted shot for preserving the unity of time and space, long takes have become an established part of the filmmaking vocabulary. Sometimes they are self-conscious demonstrations of directorial prowess, as in signature sequences from “Touch of Evil“ or “Goodfellas.” Just as often they lend themselves to low-key, observational styles as in the work of the Italian neorealists like Roberto Rossellini and their present-day descendants like Abbas Kiarostami. . They also permit durational experiments like the unblinking films of Andy Warhol, whose “Empire,” a fixed shot of the Empire State Building, lasts more than eight hours. (Warhol used a 16-millimeter camera that could shoot for 33 minutes continuously.)

Authentic one-shot features began to emerge at the turn of this millennium thanks to the greater mobility and capacity of digital equipment. Mike Figgis’s “Time Code” (2000) tells four simultaneous real-time stories, each captured in a single take and shown in one quadrant of the screen. Alexander Sokurov’s 96-minute “Russian Ark” (2002) tours the Hermitage Museum in one long Steadicam shot (although the sound was added later).

Choreographed by necessity but also subject to happenstance, one-shot movies exist on a spectrum between control and contingency. Rather than employ a Steadicam, which would have ballooned the budget and required a camera operator, Ms. Cohn and Mr. Sniadecki devised a makeshift dolly: one of them would shoot from a wheelchair that the other would slowly push. Over three weeks they shot 23 takes ranging from 45 to 100 minutes, with many more aborted because of mishaps like miscommunication with each other or children running into their path. (The final film, which is being shown this week at the New Directors/New Films festival in New York, uses a 75-minute segment from the 19th try.)

An exuberant mingling of street theater and anything-can-happen documentary, “People’s Park” has less in common with the meticulous orchestrations of “Russian Ark” than with the photographer-filmmaker Robert Frank’s “C’est Vrai” (1990), a 60-minute one-take ramble through his Lower Manhattan neighborhood, recorded on analog video and featuring both staged and spontaneous encounters. Ms. Cohn and Mr. Sniadecki spent a week mapping a route through the park. Though they befriended the regulars and took care to avoid potentially disruptive spots like playgrounds, they welcomed the possibility of happy accidents.

Mindful that they were in a public space that doubled as a communal stage, they acknowledged their own role as performers, conspicuous with their wheelchair dolly and protruding microphones.

“We were offering ourselves up as a spectacle to be observed, as much as the people performing in the park,” Mr. Sniadecki said.

“People’s Park” is hardly the only film to take advantage of the newfound ability of the digital camera, further abetted by large memory cards and external battery packs, to record for hours at a time. David Redmon and Ashley Sabin, whose new documentary “Downeast” centers on the fishing economy in a Maine town, have also made a one-shot companion piece, “Kingdom of Animal,” a 72-minute portrait of workers at a fish-processing plant.

The newly completed Swedish film “7333 Seconds of Johanna” bills itself as the longest-ever one-shot feature; the Web site Cineuropa reports that the 122-minute movie was made in the presence of observers from Guinness World Records.

Even for films that merely appear to be a single shot — like the Uruguayan haunted-house movie “La Casa Muda” (2010) and its American remake “Silent House” (2012) — the impression of a high-wire stunt remains a selling point, decades after Hitchcock’s “Rope.”

But for “People’s Park,” Ms. Cohn said, long-take movies were less of an influence than Chinese scroll paintings, in particular the Song dynasty-era panorama “Along the River During the Qingming Festival,” which captures “all aspects of daily life, the courtiers, market people, artists, entertainers,” she said.

Mr. Sniadecki added: “There’s no hierarchical favor and the painting gives equal attention to them all. We tried to do a 21st-century digital upgrade.”