BEIJING — The news made global headlines on Wednesday: Queen Elizabeth II of England had remarked at a Buckingham Palace garden party the previous day that Chinese officials accompanying President Xi Jinping on a state visit had been “very rude.”

An officially released video of the comment, made in conversation with a Metropolitan police commander, Lucy D’Orsi, circulated widely online. Ms. D’Orsi had managed security during Mr. Xi’s visit in October. At the party, the queen, widely considered a paragon of decorum, was expressing sympathy with Ms. D’Orsi over difficulties the policewoman had experienced, saying it was “bad luck” that she had had to deal with the officials.

Ms. D’Orsi said that Chinese officials at one point stormed out of a meeting in London with her and Barbara Woodward, the British ambassador to China, and threatened to cancel Mr. Xi’s visit.

The queen’s words resonated online. Among hundreds of comments on The New York Times article, one reader from Michigan wrote: “Hats off to the queen for telling it like it is. The Chinese government is a rude bully, as it demonstrates repeatedly by its actions around the world.”

A reader from New Hampshire asked: “Wasn’t the imposition of opium on the Chinese by the British just a bit rude also?”

And then there were these words from a reader in upstate New York: “Rude? Walking around with a crown and a pedigree is an affront to the human race. Monarchs are ridiculous, when stripped of the thugs who keep them in power.”

Global Times, a state-run newspaper with a strong streak of nationalism, published an editorial on Thursday that said ties between the two nations would not be affected by the queen’s remarks. It also criticized British journalists for reporting on the comments.

“The disrespectful gossipers in the media there, narcissistic and baring their fangs, seemingly retain vestiges of the inelegance of barbarians,” it said. “We believe, however, that with constant contact with the 5,000-year-old civilization of the East, they will make progress.”

On Wednesday afternoon, Western journalists in Beijing pressed a spokesman for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Lu Kang, about the comments by the queen. The questions took up half a regularly scheduled news conference. By the end, Mr. Lu had grown weary of the barrage, as the transcript below shows.

The Foreign Ministry usually censors questions on delicate matters from its transcripts of the briefings. And some officials certainly considered the queen’s remarks objectionable — a televised BBC report about the exchange was blacked out in China on Wednesday. Yet, in its transcript of the Wednesday session, the ministry retained nearly all the questions about the comments, with minor changes to the wording of a few queries.

There was one exception. A question from Felicia Sonmez of The Wall Street Journal and Mr. Lu’s answer were excised entirely. She asked, “Does China think that the video of the queen’s comments was released on purpose?”

Mr. Lu replied, “I think you should refer your question to those who put the footage on the website.”

Four of the questions about the remarks came from Tom Phillips of The Guardian, who appeared eager to pin down whether relations between Britain and China were still in a “golden era,” as leaders of both countries have asserted for months.

The third question in the news conference was the first to tackle the queen’s comments, after queries about Afghanistan and the United States Navy. The following questions and answers are from the official English-language transcript.

Q. The British side said yesterday that Chinese officials were very rude to the U.K. ambassador to China during President Xi Jinping’s visit to the U.K. last year. What is your response?

A. President Xi Jinping’s state visit to the U.K. last October was a great success, thanks to the enormous efforts made by teams of the two sides. Both China and the U.K. highly recognized that.

Q. Follow-up: Are you concerned that what the U.K. said will affect the bilateral relations?

A. China and the U.K. agree that President Xi Jinping’s state visit to the U.K. last October was a great success, and that the two sides made arduous efforts to make it happen. President Xi Jinping’s state visit to the U.K. last October ushered in a “golden era” for the bilateral relations. This is also echoed by the British side.

[The next two questions addressed Taiwan and the Philippines.]

Q. Has the “golden era” advocated by President Xi Jinping and U.K. Prime Minister Cameron already started? If so, when exactly did it start?

A. I think I have already made it clear when saying that President Xi Jinping’s state visit to the U.K. last October ushered in a “golden era” for the bilateral relations.

[Then came three questions: on China’s “One Belt, One Road” economic development plan, on a coming China-United States diplomatic meeting and President Obama’s planned trip to Hiroshima.]

Q. Can you confirm that the China-U.K. relationship is still in the “golden era”?

A. I have said that the successful state visit by President Xi Jinping ushered in a “golden era” for the bilateral relations. The two sides are now working together to implement various agreements reached during the state visit.

[Then came questions on Morocco and the issue of sovereign immunity for Chinese state-owned enterprises. The question afterward, from Ms. Sonmez of The Journal, about the queen, was redacted from the official transcript. The next questions on the queen’s remarks, from Mr. Phillips of The Guardian, remained in the transcript.]

Q. Chinese ambassador to the U.K. Liu Xiaoming wrote an article for The Times five days ago, criticizing the U.S. and the U.K. for meddling in the South China Sea issue. To what extent will the U.K.’s comments affect relations with China?

A. There is no need for me to repeat our position on the South China Sea issue. I am sure that you are very clear about that. It is hoped that relevant parties, especially countries outside the region, if they really want to do something on this issue, would play a constructive role and help China and Asean [Association of Southeast Asian Nations] countries resolve this issue following the dual-track approach, instead of the contrary.

The dispute has been in existence for over four decades. But that did not get in the way of regional peace, stability and security as well as commercial navigation freedom before 2010 when the so-called Rebalance to Asia strategy was introduced. China and regional countries certainly hope that this region will stay as an important engine for the world economy and enjoy peace, stability and security. We hope that countries outside the region can respect that, as it will do themselves good in the long run.

[Between the preceding question and the one below was a question about an arms race in space.]

Q. Are you surprised at what the British side said?

A. I have already said what I can say. What about you spell out what is still on your mind.