For more than 30 years, Willy Wo-Lap Lam has been one of the most widely read analysts of elite politics in China.The 62-year-old professor at Chinese University of Hong Kong is the author of five books analyzing China’s top leaders since Zhao Ziyang. His most recent book, “Chinese Politics in the Era of Xi Jinping: Renaissance, Reform, or Retrogression?”, explores how a relatively undistinguished regional official became one of the most powerful and charismatic leaders in the history of the People’s Republic. In an interview, Mr. Lam discussed what’s behind Mr. Xi’s reversal of many of the principles that have guided Chinese politics in the post-Mao era and what Mr. Lam sees as “the closing of the Chinese mind.” Excerpts follow:

Q. You have analyzed all major Chinese leaders over the past 30 years. What drew you to Xi?

A. Xi is very different from previous leaders. Basically Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao followed Deng Xiaoping’s instructions not only to reform the economy, but to carry out some degree of institutional changes. Deng didn’t believe in Western-style reforms, but he did try major institutional reforms to prevent a second Cultural Revolution and a Mao Zedong-style tyranny. So he promoted collective leadership — that the [ruling Communist Party’s] Politburo and especially its Standing Committee rule as a collective entity and the general secretary is just first among equals. Also, he didn’t want a cult of personality. Deng had a famous saying that leadership should come from the “five lakes and four seas” — from different backgrounds and all walks of life.But Xi Jinping so far has stood many of Deng’s principles on their heads. We have seen an excessive concentration of personal power by Xi Jinping. He’s not first among equals. He’s the big boss. He runs roughshod over the other six members of the Standing Committee, especially Premier Li Keqiang.

Q. Perhaps there is a plausible argument that he needs to concentrate power to push through reforms?

A. This is the so-called theory of neo-authoritarianism — that in a complex country like China, the ruler must have near-absolutist powers. Xi says that all the easy reforms have been tried out. He’s been left with difficult reforms that would impinge on the prerogatives of power blocs in the party — and so he needs extra powers to push through changes.

But the big question that I raise in the book is why thorough structural reforms are nowhere to be seen. I believe he is concentrating power for two purposes. One, to ensure that the Communist Party remains China’s perennial ruling party. He wants to be sure that no one else can challenge the supremacy of the party. Also that it only has one dominant faction, the inchoate Xi Jinping faction. It’s about amassing powers in his own hands — and it has very little to do with economic or political reform.

Q. Does he have an economic vision?

A. It’s to walk a fine line between upholding the party’s control over the economy on the one hand, and continuing with market reforms on the other. So he’s pushing reforms such as the globalization of the Chinese currency, the renminbi, that won’t challenge the party’s control of the economy.

However, there are no plans to reform big state companies that dominate telecom, finance and natural resources. Xi has proposed slashing the bonuses of their executives, but over all, he wants to preserve these conglomerates’ monopolistic status.

Q. Limiting executive compensation sounds like a populist approach similar to the anticorruption campaign. How do you see that campaign?

A. He deserves credit for masterminding and implementing the most thorough and efficient anticorruption campaign in decades. If you just look at mid- to senior-rank officials, the number arrested is more than those incarcerated by Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao put together. However, if you look at the top-level officials, like Politburo-level cadres, and especially the princelings, it’s not impressive. He’s following Mao Zedong’s playbook of using anticorruption as a weapon against his enemies in the party.

These sorts of vigorous campaigns contrast with his low-key reputation in the provinces.

He spent 15 years in Fujian, rising to the level of governor, before leaving in 2002. Those 15 years were quite mediocre. He did nothing remarkably reformist or noteworthy. Xi’s track record in Zhejiang from 2002 to 2007 was better. But if you compare him to high-profile cadres such as Wang Yang, who was party secretary of Guangdong, he was cautious to a fault. Xi was anxious not to appear to be excessively reformist.

Q. Why the sudden change?

A. For a rising star in China, the worst thing you can do is to be seen as harboring excessive ambition and upstaging your superiors.

The other reason could have been his father’s experience. His father, Xi Zhongxun, was a liberal icon and was badly treated by Mao Zedong. My reading of his relationship with his father is that, even though it’s beyond doubt that Xi Jinping reveres his father, the latter’s political stance served as a negative example — of what not to do. So seeing how his brilliant, outspoken and liberal father was victimized by Mao, Xi Jinping decided to do the opposite: to cleave close to party orthodoxy.

His moment was in 2007, when he won the support of Jiang Zemin and former Vice President Zeng Qinghong. Jiang didn’t go along with Hu Jintao’s choice of Li Keqiang as the next general secretary and wanted an alternative candidate. So he picked Xi precisely because he thought he would be an easy person to manipulate. Xi seemed to be what the Chinese call a laohaoren [a good fellow] in addition to being a team player. This was probably Jiang Zemin’s biggest mistake. Almost immediately, Xi turned on Jiang and his faction.

Q. Once in power, what has influenced his policies?

A. He’s much more a disciple of Mao Zedong than Deng Xiaoping. In the 1950s, even though China was very poor and the military was weak, Mao implemented an audacious foreign policy — to be the leader of the developing world. He was an ultranationalist, and so is Xi. But there’s a more pragmatic reason as well: the legitimacy of the party. No one believes in Communism anymore, so without ballot-box legitimacy there are two forms of legitimacy: economic growth and nationalism. G.D.P. growth is coming down. So that leaves nationalism.

Q. In your final chapter, you talk of the closing of the Chinese mind. Is this just the political class, or is it broader?

A. It applies to ordinary people, including high school and college students, intellectuals and others. You can see it in developments like the party’s Central Document No. 9, which forbids college professors from talking about seven taboo subject matters. Xi has sponsored new legislation on state secrets and national security to crack down harder on dissidents, human rights lawyers and NGO activists.

One of Xi’s first major speeches after taking power was on the lessons from the collapse of the Soviet Union. Xi noted that the party collapsed because of de-Stalinization, because younger leaders began to denigrate the Stalinist tradition. So Xi will continue to hold up Mao Zedong’s teachings as the guiding principle of the country.

Q. How does this impact foreign policy?

A. Xi’s “Chinese dream” is focused on two centenaries: 2021 is the centenary of the founding of the Communist Party of China. By then, Xi wants China to have become a “moderately prosperous society.” The second is that by 2049, the centenary of the People’s Republic’s establishment, China will have closed the economic and military gap with the U.S.

Q. Do you think this means that tensions like we are seeing now in the South China Sea will be the norm?

A. Xi might be overreaching in being too adventurous, particularly regarding Japan and the U.S. A case in point is the reclamation works on several South China Sea islets. This reinforces the impression of China’s nervous neighbors about Beijing’s disregard for international law. The “China threat” theory will spread further. And as the U.S. dispatches more frigates and spy planes close to the disputed rocks, tension in the Spratlys will be exacerbated. Xi’s aggressive power projection could threaten peace in the Asia-Pacific region, without which China cannot achieve sustainable economic growth.

Q. And yet it seems hard for the U.S. to do anything. If China wants to build islands, for example, what can the U.S. do?

A. Right, that’s why I think he has more room to maneuver in foreign policy. So instead of tackling intractable domestic problems, Xi might spend more time on foreign policy, partly to divert the attention of the disgruntled lower classes in China. Beijing has a big war chest to underwrite initiatives such as the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the Silk Road superprojects. These are policies where results can be seen over the short haul.