Once a desolate strip hugged by slightly forbidding warehouses, factories and garages, Union Avenue just north of the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway has seen a significant transformation in recent years into the sort of glass-lined thoroughfare more typically found in trendier parts of Williamsburg, Brooklyn.

Three new sizable developments around Union Avenue, North 10th Street and Frost Street are adding almost 425 rental apartments and more than half a dozen new stores along Union Avenue. A small condo project nearby at 538 Union is also in the planning stages, said David J. Maundrell III, the president of aptsandlofts.com, which has been marketing apartments in the area.

The buildings are a natural extension of the high-rise development that took place almost a decade ago a few blocks north on Bayard Street, bordering the southern side of McCarren Park, said David A. Sigman, an executive vice president and principal of LCOR, which has developed 234 units at 250N10, a six-story glassy building at North 10th and Union.

“A lot of this is drifting down from what happened originally at Bayard, kind of driven by the park, and probably helped along by the renovation of the park and the pool,” Mr. Sigman said. “That’s your anchor to the north.”

Complete with a doorman, parking, fitness center, courtyard, rooftop lounge and roof deck, 250N10 is more than 20 percent leased since rentals began in February, he said.

Across Union Avenue, two seven-story glass buildings have been built at Nos. 568 and 544 Union Avenue by Heatherwood Communities, both with courtyards, fitness centers, concierges, parking, roof decks and lounges. The building at 568 Union also has a swimming pool.

The 95-unit 568 Union has been fully leased since early 2012, and 544 Union recently rented out all of its 94 apartments. When units are available at 544 Union, studios start at $2,400 a month, one-bedroom apartments at $3,150 and two-bedrooms at $4,100, said Douglas Partrick, the owner of Heatherwood Communities.

Rents for apartments in 250N10 are currently starting at $2,600 a month for a studio, $3,400 for a one-bedroom and $4,600 for a two-bedroom, Mr. Maundrell said.

Mr. Partrick said the small five-block pocket, a manufacturing area before a 2005 rezoning in Williamsburg, was a logical location for residential development, given its proximity to the park and Williamsburg’s two L train subway stations. Mr. Maundrell said that residents could just as easily walk to the Lorimer Street station and get on the train, and even get a seat, before it jams up at Bedford Avenue during morning commutes.

The area had virtually no retail stores, so Mr. Partrick said he decided to develop about 10,800 square feet of retail space in Heatherwood’s two buildings.

“I just thought in the long run, the retail would be very complementary to the buildings in that it would provide services to the tenants, and in turn the tenants are supporting the businesses down below,” he said.

“It’s a real mix of stores for young, single professionals and families with kids,” said Nicholas Griffin, a commercial real estate broker handling the leasing with aptsandlofts.com.

Already open is Patisserie Tomoko, a Japanese pastry shop; Lounge 568, a bar; Bitesize Pediatric Dentist; EdaMama, a children’s hair salon; and Laundry Stork, a laundry and dry-cleaning service. Leases have been signed by Souen, a macrobiotic restaurant; an organic cafe; and a day care facility, Mr. Griffin said.

He added that the retail leasing in 544 Union, the second of Heatherwood’s buildings to be developed, went quickly at $50 to $60 a square foot, as the northern part of Union Avenue, which is wide with moderate amounts of traffic, began to pick up steam as a shopping area.

“I think that will continue, and there will also be additional new retail establishments on Union north of the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway,” he said. “A couple of buildings that are sort of prime for development traded hands recently, so we’ll probably see more retail there as well.”

There are few, if any, opportunities remaining for large-scale residential development along Union Avenue north of the expressway, property developers said. However, there are several apartment buildings with 100 to 200 apartments each being developed on North Eighth and North Ninth Streets about a block west of Union, Mr. Sigman said.

A residential building with almost 200 units being constructed at 88 Richardson Street, about two blocks east of Union, should also provide plenty of customers for Union Avenue’s new stores, Mr. Partrick said.

Residential and commercial development is also taking place along Union Avenue south of the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, where a combination hotel-and-residential building with retail space is being constructed at 500 Metropolitan Avenue, along with another hotel and a 33-unit rental building leasing at 281 Union Avenue, Mr. Maundrell said.

Starbucks has also been advertising job listings for a store to open at 405-409 Union Avenue, in a rental building constructed several years ago.

The area south of the expressway has always had a different feel to it from the formerly industrial pocket to the north, which has seen the more visible transformation, said Mr. Maundrell, who grew up nearby and walked Union Avenue on a daily basis as a child.

“There were always more people down south of the expressway, more retail, more life to the area,” he said. “The north side was never really threatening, but it was a little barren.”