AL GORE lives alone now, in a 10,000-square-foot colonial in Nashville, where magnolia trees shade the house and geothermal wells, buried beneath the driveway, cool and heat its 20 rooms.

Some weeks Mr. Gore heads to San Francisco, where he has a luxury apartment at the St. Regis tower, to work on venture capital projects or visit his new girlfriend. And some nights he checks into the Regency in New York, where three of his children live.

At 64, even after accumulating more than $100 million in wealth, Mr. Gore races like a man making up for lost time: blog posts to write, business deals to close, a global climate to save.

Tipper Gore lives alone now, too, and at a gentler pace — the pace she wanted when the Gores separated in June 2010.

She divides her time between their $9 million seaside villa near Santa Barbara, Calif., and her maternal family home in Arlington, Va., near her 89-year-old father. She, too, is in New York often and is also working (selling her photography through her Web site) and dating someone new.

The couple reunites a few times a year, most recently in June, for summer family vacations and Christmases in the Gore family seat of Carthage, Tenn.

They gather at the old farm and lake where Mr. Gore’s father, a congressman and senator, had once dreamed about his son becoming president. Back then the Gores had the makings of a political dynasty, and the paterfamilias, Albert Gore Sr., certainly held that ambition.

But hard times happen. Reckonings occur. And dynasties require both continuity and a next generation. The four Gore children, having been raised in the hothouse of Washington, want nothing to do with it.

The oldest, Karenna Gore Schiff, an adviser to Mr. Gore during his 2000 presidential campaign, has struggled with personal troubles and is rebuilding her life after a separation from her husband. Kristin Gore weathered a divorce in 2009 and has found success as a novelist. Albert III, known mostly for youthful indiscretions with alcohol and marijuana, is an executive working on urban renewal. And Sarah, once in medical school, is now an artist and married in California.

No family member has moved on from the political world more than Al Gore, who, according to interviews with more than 40 family friends and associates, is mostly at peace these days with losing the presidency in 2000.

Several friends have even heard him muse about whether he would have gone into politics if not for his father; he might have continued his early career as a journalist, or become a professor.

As for rubbing shoulders with the Washington elite, it is so unappealing that Mr. Gore has chosen to skip the Democratic Party convention in Charlotte, N.C., and will instead spend the next two weeks on his cable channel, Current TV, leading the coverage of both major-party conventions from New York.

Offering color commentary in a television studio is a lifetime away from another August convention, just 12 years ago, just before the decline and fall of the House of Gore began. But for Mr. Gore, Current TV is about living in the present; the cut and thrust of politics is the past.

Still, several of his friends expect that on the final night of the Charlotte convention, as the other talking heads squawk to be heard, Mr. Gore’s mind will wander back to another stage in another city.

THEY looked like the perfect American family. It was Aug. 17, 2000, and Vice President Al Gore had just accepted his party’s presidential nomination at the Staples Center in Los Angeles. Under red, white and blue confetti, Mr. Gore’s purposeful poise melted away as he spotted Tipper entering from the wings. He strode over and gave her a deep, long, passionate kiss, their second in prime time that night.

The media made much of “The Kiss,” given Mr. Gore’s usual stiffness, but friends of the couple simply saw classic Al and Tipper, the eternal lovestruck teenagers, who first locked eyes at his high school prom and had been swooning ever since.

Moments later their children appeared on stage. Sarah, the youngest, tapped Mr. Gore’s back and threw her arms around him. Kristin, the middle daughter, beamed at their side. Albert, then in high school, went to Tipper, as he often did.

Hanging back a bit and waving to the delegates was Karenna, who by then had a political orbit of her own as a campaign adviser; some Gore aides saw her as the most primed to follow in the family business.

It was a Gore tableau worthy of framing: smiling, attractive, united. Theirs was a bond that would help them recover from the heartbreak of George W. Bush taking the oath of office. A bond that inspired Al and Tipper Gore, in 2002, to publish a book about family titled “Joined at the Heart.” A bond, as they wrote in that book’s dedication, that they prayed would never be broken.

The bond endures, but the marital separation of Mr. and Mrs. Gore, and their desire to let go of electoral politics, have ended their role as a storied political family that figured in every presidential election from 1988 to 2008.

While Mr. Gore has never ruled out running again for president, close friends say that he has no desire to run and cannot conceive of another campaign. The main reason, they say, is that his devotion to environmental advocacy, which brought him the Nobel Peace Prize in 2007, has sharpened his own outlook on what he wants to do with his life.

Such perspective has been a long time coming for Mr. Gore. He was raised in the Washington power circles of his father and his political savvy mother, Pauline, then studied at the university of princelings — Harvard — and later attended Vanderbilt Law School, fulfilling a hope of his parents.

He dropped out to run for Congress, also at his parents’ encouragement. He ran for president in 1988, even though he was known as a policy wonk who disdained the pettiness of politics. And in 2000 he ran and lost again, a crushing blow, but one that finally led to a life and career that he, and not his parents, wished for.

“Al Gore loved policy but he never really liked campaigning, making phone calls to donors, all the things you have to do running for office,” said Tony Coehlo, who was chairman of Mr. Gore’s presidential campaign in 2000. “He was set on a course to the presidency at a very young age, by this father, and he came to appreciate public office. But politics and governing were foremost a family inheritance for him.”

Mr. Gore began to make peace with a life out of politics in 2002, when he decided not to challenge George W. Bush in 2004 — a decision that Mr. Gore thought was sensible but also painful, friends say. Losing the presidency in 2000 had induced a kind of post-traumatic stress syndrome in him and other family members; some of the children had nightmares and anxiety dreams involving that campaign. Running for the White House again, Mr. Gore thought, might just prolong the pain and put off the possibility of catharsis and a state of grace.

He dealt with the trauma not by conducting a shadow presidency in his imagination; rather, at first, he grew a beard, ate too much and got fat, then found new ventures and preoccupations. He is not temperamentally inclined to walk around the house in a rage about the rightness of his policy prescriptions; he is more introverted, more of a brooder than a yeller, more likely to get lost in arcane data on the Internet.

If pressed, he uses gallows humor to deal with the pain, referring to himself as a “recovering politician” and saying he “used to be the next president of the United States.” Another joke, a bit more wistful and a bit closer to the bone, comes when people tell him that he would have governed differently than Mr. Bush. Mr. Gore usually replies, “You know what: I would have just made different mistakes.”

A close friend of Mr. Gore’s noted: “I doubt he’ll ever be totally-every-day-at-peace with losing in 2000. But he doesn’t rant about the way he would have run the country. He doesn’t let his anger take priority over his policy obsessions, where he still believes he can make a difference. What has helped him the most, I think, is that he is utterly convinced of two things: that he has finally found his true calling in life, and that he is finally free to be his own man.”

Redemption is the word used by Donna Brazile, Mr. Gore’s campaign manager in the 2000 race.

“The story of Al Gore is that, whenever he is knocked around — in ’88, in 2000, at other moments in his life — he has gotten back up because he believes in himself,” Ms. Brazile said. “His parents dreamed about him becoming president. He never won the White House, but he went on to find redemption with the Nobel for the work he cares most about.”

The last dozen years have also brought Mr. Gore enormous wealth from his roles as an adviser to Google, a board member at Apple and an investment partner at Kleiner Perkins, a venture capital firm in Silicon Valley. His net worth is believed to be more than $100 million .

Mostly splitting his time between Nashville and the three-bedroom 2,800-square-foot apartment at the St. Regis, Mr. Gore still spends hours most days on writing (he has a book set to come out in early 2013 on global economics and politics) and consulting about policy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Just last week he helped train a San Francisco conference of 1,000 environmental advocates on spreading the word about the effects of climate change.

It was Tipper who, after the 2000 loss, encouraged Mr. Gore to dust off an old slide show he assembled years earlier on climate change and begin showing it to concerned citizens. His zeal grew so great that he started a nonprofit organization, now known as the Climate Reality Project, and evolved “from a politician into a prophet,” said Robert Shrum, another Gore friend and adviser from 2000.

Prophets can be scolds, of course, but Mr. Gore has mostly kept away from the bully pulpit so that caricatures of him as a partisan loon do not overshadow his policy concerns, friends say.

When he has sallied forth on climate change in a high-profile way, he has tried to take on members of both parties, as he did in a Rolling Stone article last year that sharply assailed the Obama White House, as well as Republicans. Friends of Mr. Gore say that he remains on good terms with President Obama, but that, from a policy perspective, the relationship is not as robust as Mr. Gore had hoped.

As for America’s other reigning Democratic family, the Clintons, Mr. Gore and President Clinton began mending fences damaged by the 2000 campaign during time they spent together immediately after the Sept. 11 attacks.

They occasionally talk by phone or make an effort to see each other, friends say. Mr. Clinton spent a few hours with Mr. Gore at the Nashville house last year at the time of the funeral of Ned McWherter, a former governor of Tennessee, and they caught up last fall at a memorial service for Steve Jobs.

Mr. Gore has also spoken a couple of times to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton on environmental issues, though the conversations were informal and Mr. Gore has not been involved in policy-making.

“The families aren’t as close as they once were,” a friend of Mr. and Mrs. Gore said. “They all have other lives now. But there is a bond there that is meaningful to all of them as they get older.”

LEAVING the political stage invariably made it easier for Mr. and Mrs. Gore to separate. If the couple were still involved in politics, they probably would not have split up, several friends said. Politics prizes picture-perfect nuclear families; the Gores, in turn, felt free to pursue independent lives as their priorities diverged.

The decision to separate was mutual and did not involve a betrayal like infidelity, according to friends. Rather, they said, the 64-year-old Mrs. Gore had wanted their lives to ease up, more time to enjoy the fruits of their labors. (The Gores and their children declined to be interviewed for this article.)

In 2009, a year before the separation, they bought the Italian-style villa in Montecito, Calif., where Mrs. Gore hoped they would spend far more time relaxing and working on projects. Mrs. Gore also became increasingly passionate about her landscape and portrait photography, which, until recently, she had been selling at stores owned by her friends Mitchell Gold and Bob Williams.

Mr. Gold first met Mrs. Gore at a gay rights organization dinner in 2002, and a year later went to Arlington to help with her home makeover there. He encouraged her to hang several of her photos, which had been stored away in boxes, and later began holding small exhibits of her work in his stores.

In the spring of 2010 her photos went on sale in the stores, and he and Mr. Williams held a reception for her in Washington; Mr. Gold said that Mr. Gore did not attend the event, which was around the time that the Gores were preparing to announce their separation.

“Tipper wants a much more quiet life for herself — we had to push her a little bit to put her photography on sale — and I think she has found that now,” Mr. Gold said. “Her life, I think, is centered around being happy in life, being happy with her family and her photography and Santa Barbara.”

But for Mr. Gore, even winning the Nobel (as well as the Academy Award honor for the climate-change documentary “An Inconvenient Truth”) was not enough for him to slow down. A workaholic since his days in politics, Mr. Gore’s professional interests now include Current TV — which he and his partners have struggled to turn into a leading news operation — as well as Apple, Google, various ventures run out of offices in Silicon Valley and Mr. Gore’s London-based Generation Investment Management.

He is traveling constantly, to conclaves at the Aspen Institute and speaking and consulting engagements overseas; last winter he led a trip to Antarctica under the auspices of the Climate Reality Project that included the British businessman Richard Branson, Ted Turner and several scientists.

“Al obsesses about what the world will end up becoming,” said one friend of the Gores, “and I know that was tiring for Tipper to be around. Al never really unplugs and just enjoys himself. He seems wired to always be thinking about what he could potentially do to save the world.”

A Democratic Party donor close to Mr. Gore, Orin Kramer, recalled attending a volunteer-training session a few years ago for Climate Reality, where he expected Mr. Gore to warm up the audience with a half-hour presentation of the environmental slide show that formed the basis for “An Inconvenient Truth.”

“He stood up there on-and-off for eight hours, going through the slides, with the kind of intensity you’d expect if he was giving the slide show for the very first time,” Mr. Kramer said. “He doesn’t adhere to anything close to a 40-hour workweek.”

Mr. Gore does do some fund-raising for longtime Democratic friends from time to time; he spoke not long ago at a Silicon Valley cocktail party for Florida Senator Bill Nelson, running for re-election this year.

“Gore has a new group of friends in the tech industry, Silicon Valley, from business ventures, who are less interested in politics than they are very, very loyal to him,” said an adviser to Senator Nelson who spoke on the condition of anonymity.

There are few conspicuous examples of Mr. Gore’s new wealth, beyond the Montecito villa and the St. Regis apartment. For all his traveling, Mr. Gore does not lease a plane; he flies commercially more than on corporate jets, often taking the budget airline Southwest to Nashville.

He did spend lavishly on his daughter Sarah’s wedding (a guest recalled a wall at the reception covered with fresh roses), and he is said to be generous with relatives and staff members.

At the same time he has not become a big entertainer; several friends said that while he likes people dropping by the Nashville home, he does not have parties there or at the St. Regis. He does seem to have loosened up, though.

“The last time I saw Gore at the Regency, I was struck by how incredibly relaxed he looked,” said the Rev. Al Sharpton, who now has a talk show on MSNBC. “He said to me, ‘Who would have ever thought that Al Sharpton would be skinny and have a TV show?’ And I said, ‘Who would have ever thought Al Gore would have gotten chubby and own a TV channel?’ That got a belly laugh out of him. He wasn’t always that casual.”

IN their new lives, both Gores have also begun dating other people. Mr. Gore has been seeing a fellow environmental advocate and Democratic Party donor, Elizabeth Keadle, who lives in California, while Mrs. Gore has been seeing a fellow photographer and former editor of National Geographic, Bill Allen.

(Mr. Gore was in the news in 2010 over sexual harassment allegations made by a massage therapist in Oregon; Mr. Gore denied the claims. A county district attorney later announced that there was no basis for prosecution, citing contradictory evidence, lack of forensic evidence, conflicting witness statements and credibility issues.)

When Mr. and Mrs. Gore have come together again, it mostly has to do with their children. Last summer, for instance, they both showed up to a book party in Washington for their daughter Kristin.

Mrs. Gore arrived first — punctuality is very important to her, Mr. Gold said — and she reacted playfully when Mr. Gore showed up. “Hi, honey!” she called out in an exaggerated Southern twang, according to two guests. The two later chatted and posed for photos with their daughter.

“Tipper and Al may live in different parts of the country, and may be very happy with their own lives these days, but the children always bring them together,” said Christine Leverone Orrall, a friend of the Gores in Nashville. “I think they’re showing how you can be happy and healthy apart while still focusing on their children and their life together as a family.”

Kristin, Karenna, and Albert — who is now a business development executive at a real estate management firm — all live in New York. Both their parents often visit the city, particularly to help Karenna Gore Schiff, the mother of three young children, in the aftermath of her separation in 2010 from Drew Schiff, a doctor.

Friends of Ms. Gore Schiff say that she has endured personal problems before and since the separation, and that her parents have helped boost her mood and have been an essential part of her support network. Ms. Gore Schiff and Dr. Schiff have an amicable joint custody arrangement, and she is said to be doing better these days.

Of the four children, Ms. Gore Schiff, a Columbia Law School graduate, had by far the highest public profile — and of the four, questions have swirled the most around her, given her far lower profile today. There was talk over the years about her running for political office, but several friends of Ms. Gore Schiff said that her focus now was on raising her children and rebuilding her personal life. They also noted that her interests, like her father’s, had shifted from the old family turf of elective politics.

“Karenna got very caught up with the 2000 race, seeing herself as one of the best messengers for her father, and she inserted herself with a pretty heavy hand into the politics and the policy,” said one senior official on the 2000 Gore campaign who worked with her regularly. “The vice president trusted her and appreciated her, especially when she took on events that Tipper was less inclined to do. A lot of us thought Karenna had the bug for public office, though her personality could be so intense, I’m not sure if that would wear well as a candidate herself.”

Ms. Gore Schiff is now a master’s degree student at the Union Theological Seminary (her father was in divinity school before law school), and she is heavily involved with the Association to Benefit Children, a New York-based nonprofit, where she is now a board member. Tom Styron, the group’s chairman, said that Ms. Gore Schiff and another board member, former Mayor David Dinkins, handled most of the outreach to elected officials and government agencies.

“Karenna and the mayor are usually our go-to people in terms of figuring out how to use political capital for our cause,” said Dr. Styron, a clinical psychologist on the Yale Medical School faculty and son of the author William Styron.

“She is also a very private person, very protective of her family and her children,” Dr. Styron said. “To the extent that she has gone through difficult times personally, she keeps that to herself, while taking her responsibilities very seriously.”

The Gore family’s move away from politics is a rare one, said Stephen Hess, a scholar at the Brookings Institution who has written extensively about American political dynasties. In recent decades, government has been replete with fathers and mothers and their grown children and grandchildren coming in and out of elected office. In the Gores, Mr. Hess sees a family that was set on a path to power by a patriarch, Albert Gore Sr., that his son and grandchildren took years to make a clean break from.

“I sometimes think that Al Gore would never have gone into politics if his father had not been a politician himself,” Mr. Hess said. “It makes you wonder about our political dynasties, and how many of them are defined by a love of service and how many are kept in place because the younger generations feel an obligation.”

Friends of the Gores are quick to point out that Al Gore was hardly unhappy as a congressman, senator or vice president, and that, for nearly 25 years, he and Mrs. Gore made the most of their lives in the Washington spotlight. Still, these friends said that the Gores now seem as content as they have ever been.

“Al and Tipper were the happily married couple of American politics for 30 years,” Mr. Coehlo said. “They packaged themselves that way for political consumption, and now they have unpackaged that image in the interest of their own happiness.

“They are still a family, but they have become the kind of family that they want to be.”