It was Saturday night at the giant Aviator Sports complex at Floyd Bennett Field in Brooklyn, and 20,000 millennials dressed in T-shirts, shorts and glow-in-the-dark necklaces were dancing to electronic music. D.J.’s kept the tempo upbeat, while dancers on stage threw confetti and beach balls into the beer-fueled and sweaty crowd.

This wasn’t a flash mob or a warehouse rave, but the finish line for a five-kilometer run combining jogging with partying. Called the Night Nation Run, it is among a new class of races that appeal to all non-runners who want to stay fit in a festive, silly and noncompetitive environment.

The races are popular among 20- and 30-somethings, offering them not just great Instagram moments to share with friends, but an opportunity to flirt and socialize outside of bars and hookup apps.

”It’s supposed to be a party more than a run, so it’s a perfect mix,” Cilia Kutzer, 22, an au pair living in South Orange, N.J., said during the Night Nation Run in May.

One of the pioneers of a 5K that was actually a party was Travis Snyder, 37, a fitness entrepreneur. He got the idea for such races from a nighttime show at the Disney California Adventure park, where visitors are dazzled by colorful fog, mist, lights, fire and lasers. Though he was living in Salt Lake City at the time, he chose the Phoenix area for the first Color Run, in 2012, because he thought it would be a good place for a messy 5K fun run where participants would be showered with colored powder.

He went there to plan and market the event, distributing fliers and talking to students on the Arizona State University campus in Tempe. They told their friends, and soon 6,000 had signed up. “It was the first time I knew we had something,” Mr. Snyder said. “There was this whole dormant part of the population that wanted to go and do stuff but felt threatened.”

Since then, Mr. Snyder, who lives in Hermosa Beach, Calif., has organized about 250 runs worldwide, including in Paris, where last April 25,000 people ran along the Seine and finished at the Eiffel Tower. “People find a lot of value in coming together and doing something memorable and fun and health-based,” he said.

In addition to the Color Run, Mr. Snyder also operates the Electric Run, where participants don costumes like furry bear suits and run with laser-light shows above their heads while giving one another high-fives and hugs.

The runs have also become a business, with runners paying $50 to participate. Mr. Snyder’s company, the Color Run, has offices in Los Angeles and Salt Lake City with 70 full-time employees. Mr. Snyder added that 60 percent of participants in the Color Run have never run a 5K race before, “so the idea that three million people globally went out and ran a 5K for their first time is pretty awesome to me,” he said.

Matt Britton, the author of the book “YouthNation” and founder of the millennial marketing firm MRY in New York, said that these runs are tailor-made for 20-somethings looking for photogenic experiences to share on social media. “If experiences can’t be talked about, it’s hard to break through to this generation,” he said. “Experiences build people’s persona. Sharing it is equally as important as the experience itself.”

The Night Nation Run, for example, has stations along the route where participants can stop and take photos in their glow-in-the-dark outfits.

Exercise often is beside the point. At a Color Run this year at Citi Field in Queens, few participants actually ran. Most walked the 5K length, stopping frequently to give one another bear hugs, take selfies and roll around in colored powder.

Among them was Beatrice Andre, a 34-year-old M.R.I. technician from New York, who said she has participated in several races. “I don’t like to exert that much energy if I don’t have to,” she said. “If we were doing a regular marathon, I would get discouraged after awhile. Here you have a distraction every couple of minutes.”