Jeremy Lin is heading to Houston, leaving the bright lights of Broadway and a legion of heartbroken Knicks fans behind. Linsanity, the exhilarating rush sparked by Lin’s meteoric rise to fame, is over, at least in New York.

The Knicks cut ties with Lin on Tuesday night, ending a brief, spectacular and now-bittersweet love affair between Lin, a 23-year-old point guard, and an adoring fan base. Lin will play next season for the Houston Rockets, who signed him to a three-year, $25.1 million offer sheet that the Knicks elected not to match.

The Knicks conveyed their intentions to Lin sometime after 10 p.m., a person with knowledge of the conversation said. By rule, the Knicks had until 11:59 p.m. Eastern time to match the offer or let Lin walk.

After many hours of silence, a Knicks spokesman ended any remaining suspense with a brief statement around 10:45 p.m., saying simply, “I can confirm we are not matching.”

The final decision rested with James L. Dolan, the Madison Square Garden chairman, and Dolan was the only one who could reverse it as the final hours ticked away Tuesday. He did not.

The decision was said to be financial, not emotional. Lin’s contract contains a third-year balloon payment of $14.9 million, which would have cost the Knicks another $35 million or more in luxury-tax penalties. This so-called poison pill was devised by the Rockets to dissuade the Knicks from matching, and it proved effective.

Knicks officials ultimately concluded that it made more sense to pay two veteran point guards, Jason Kidd and Raymond Felton, a combined $7 million in 2014-15, than to spend $50 million or more to keep Lin, who has yet to play a full season as a starter.

So the Knicks’ most popular player in more than a decade, who rose from obscurity, saved their season and became a global sensation, is gone. He will join a rebuilding Rockets team that is pushing hard to land Dwight Howard, the Orlando Magic’s disgruntled star center, but has little established talent at the moment.

Lin spent just 26 games as the Knicks’ primary point guard last season, but it was a memorable, often spectacular run, filled with buzzer-beating shots, dazzling passes and bold drives to the rim. It began with a seven-game winning streak that electrified the Garden and spawned a household word: Linsanity.

Along the way, Lin outdueled Kobe Bryant in a victory over the Los Angeles Lakers and outshone Dirk Nowitzki to beat the Dallas Mavericks. His fame grew exponentially because of his unique profile: a Harvard graduate and Taiwanese-American who went undrafted and was waived twice before finding his niche with the Knicks.

A knee injury, and subsequent surgery, ended Lin’s magical run in late March. He averaged 18.5 points and 7.6 assists in that run — statistics that would place him among the N.B.A.’s top point guards if he had sustained them for a full season. Yet Lin also had an above-average turnover rate, and he struggled against some of the league’s top defensive teams.

Despite Lin’s great promise, his portrait remains incomplete. He is clearly better than the scouting reports suggested when he went undrafted in 2010. Still unknown is whether he will be a star, a flash in the pain or merely a very good point guard.

Whatever he may become, it will happen with the Rockets, who have placed a great deal of faith and money in Lin. Houston has stripped away most of its roster — including its two top point guards, Kyle Lowry and Goran Dragic — in an attempt to clear room for Howard. A pick-and-roll tandem of Lin and Howard could be devastating and entertaining.

The Rockets also have established business ties to China, stemming from Yao Ming's tenure in Houston, so Lin might have added value.

Now comes the inevitable backlash from an embittered fan base that is suspicious of the Knicks’ motives and already disdainful of Dolan’s leadership.

Fans started at least two online petitions to keep Lin in recent days, after it became apparent the Knicks were leaning toward letting him go. As the news spread Tuesday, fans on Twitter lashed out at Dolan and Knicks management. Some renounced their loyalty to the team and said they would root for the Brooklyn-bound Nets.