Midtown East does not usually make an apartment hunter’s shortlist.

But with prices there lower than in many other Manhattan neighborhoods, buyers and developers are taking a fresh look at the area, roughly defined as from Fifth Avenue to the East River between 40th and 59th Streets, particularly its eastern swath. Until recently, the neighborhood’s biggest draw was its enviable commute to the office. Now, that perception is changing.

In recent months, developers have broken ground on several luxury projects, including 50 United Nations Plaza, a 43-story luxury tower rising across from the United Nations Secretariat Building where condominium prices will begin just north of $2 million. As high-rises reshape the skyline, new upscale restaurants are adding a sophisticated flavor to the Second Avenue corridor, which has long been dismissed as a forgettable happy-hour magnet for young office workers.

“People associate Midtown East with work, they don’t think of it as residential,” said Victoria Vinokur, a broker with Halstead Property. “We don’t have the boutiques, we don’t have the SoHo atmosphere. But I think this is such a terrific, true Old World neighborhood. It’s very discreet. It’s very charming.”

Celebrities are taking notice. Last year, the actress Uma Thurman bought an apartment in the exclusive River House on East 52nd Street. And this spring Mary-Kate Olsen and her fiancé, Olivier Sarkozy, bought a townhouse in Turtle Bay Gardens, an enclave of rowhouses along 48th and 49th Streets, between Second and Third Avenues. The actress Katharine Hepburn lived in one of the houses on 49th Street for decades.

Residential construction has been frenzied recently. A 61-story tower designed by Foster and Partners, the firm headed by the Pritzker Prize-winning architect Norman Foster, is rising at 610 Lexington Avenue next to the Seagram Building. Construction is underway at the Sutton, a 30-story tower at 959 First Avenue. And last month, sales began at the CookFox-designed 301 East 50th Street, a 29-story building with a limestone facade.

Added to that, the commercial area around Grand Central Terminal also might change dramatically in coming years once Mayor Bill de Blasio revives a proposal to rezone about 70 blocks of Midtown East. The original plan, which fizzled in the waning days of the Bloomberg administration, would have paved the way for a new generation of taller, state-of-the-art office buildings. As a first step in a long-term rezoning effort, the de Blasio administration plans to rezone Vanderbilt Avenue to allow for a 1,200-foot-tall skyscraper and a pedestrian plaza, along with infrastructure improvements.

“It’s a lot happening all at once, and the people in the immediate vicinity are certainly struggling with the effects” of simultaneous construction projects, said Daniel R. Garodnick, a member of the City Council whose district includes Midtown East. Mr. Garodnick is part of a task force that will provide the mayor with recommendations on how to rezone the commercial area.

Despite the influx of luxury high-rises, Midtown East still sells at a discount compared with trendier Manhattan neighborhoods. In 2013, the average price for a condo in Midtown East, from Fifth Avenue to the East River, was $1.85 million compared with $3.22 million in the West Village. Closer to the river, prices drop further, to $1.48 million for a condo in Turtle Bay, according to data provided by CityRealty.

“Manhattan is inward-looking,” said Jonathan J. Miller, the president of the appraisal firm Miller Samuel. “Unless you’re directly on the water, values often tend to slide downward as you move away from the center.”

Paul Lerner, 44, a publicist, paid $1.4 million in 2008 for a spacious two-bedroom with city views in the Sutton House on East 52nd Street. “I got a lot of bang for my buck,” he said. “I looked at Chelsea — I so wanted to be that person.” But apartments he saw there were dark and “depressing,” he said. “I love where I live.”

A Whole Foods Market opened in 2012 on East 57th Street as part of a development that also included a new space for two public schools, which has given local parents a reason to stay put. After a long delay, construction recently began on the residential component of the project, a 65-story tower at Second Avenue with a mix of condos and rental units. In the last few years, decidedly downtown eateries like the Smith and Socarrat Paella Bar have opened outposts along Second Avenue.

“We thought that a Socarrat in the middle of nowhere would be good,” said Jesus Manso, the owner of the Spanish restaurant, which also has locations in Chelsea and NoLIta.

On a recent Saturday evening, Crave Fishbar, a restaurant on Second Avenue with a nautical décor, was crowded with diners. The restaurant’s original location across the street, when it was known as Crave Ceviche Bar, was destroyed by a deadly construction crane disaster in 2008. Two years later, the restaurant’s owners bought the current location at 945 Second Avenue for $4.5 million. They renovated the apartments above the restaurant, adding a penthouse duplex with a terrace where the chef, Todd Mitgang, now lives with his wife and two children. “We felt like we had a strong tie to a neighborhood,” Mr. Mitgang said.

Now, a 32-story residential tower, Halcyon, is rising at 305 East 51st Street, the site of the crane disaster. Designed by SLCE Architects, the building has interiors by S. Russell Groves. Sales have been brisk, with 65 percent of the 123 units already sold. Prices for the remaining units start at $1.635 million for a one-bedroom.

This is not the first time Midtown East has gotten notice. It has exquisite historic districts like Tudor City and Sutton Place, which has been home to some of the city’s most celebrated artists and intellectuals, including Irving Berlin, Maxwell Perkins and Kurt Vonnegut. Gloria Vanderbilt lives on Beekman Place. And Stephen Sondheim lives in Turtle Bay Gardens. In his famous homage to the city, “Here Is New York,” E. B. White included a tribute to the picturesque willow tree that stood in Turtle Bay Gardens outside his window. (The tree met its end in 2009.)

But the area near the East River has not always been an enviable place to live. In the late 1860s, the little bay that gave Turtle Bay its name was filled in and the waterfront became home to slaughterhouses, coal yards and stockyards. “At the turn of the century it was not a good neighborhood,” said Pamela Hanlon, the author of “Manhattan’s Turtle Bay: Story of a Midtown Neighborhood” (Arcadia Publishing, 2008). In the 1920s, the area began to improve, and it entered a new era when the United Nations arrived after World War II.

William Zeckendorf Sr. assembled the land where the United Nations building was eventually built. He then sold the land to John D. Rockefeller Jr., who subsequently donated it to the United Nations. Now, decades later, his grandsons are building 50 United Nations Plaza, a 43-story stainless-steel tower with expansive bay windows designed by Foster and Partners. It is being developed by Zeckendorf Development and Global Holdings, and most of the 88 units will have views of the United Nations building. A seven-foot-tall privacy hedge will surround a gated motor court for residents. Prices start at $2.21 million for a one-bedroom on a lower floor.

The tower’s crown jewel is a duplex that can be combined with a full-floor penthouse below, creating a 16,000-square-foot space with 13 bedrooms and a rooftop pool. The price tag is $100 million.

“At these prices, 50 U.N. Plaza will change the game in that neighborhood,” said Pete Culliney, the director of research and analytics for CityRealty.

The blocks closer to the East River have an international feel bolstered by the United Nations. First Avenue is peppered with specialty shops like Ideal Cheese, L. Simchick & Company Meats and the fishmonger Pisacane Midtown Seafood. A weekly greenmarket at Dag Hammarskjold Plaza on East 47th Street is another amenity. Residents have begun noticing more strollers at the neighborhood playgrounds, like MacArthur Playground on East 49th Street near the river.

The neighborhood still has some reluctant adapters, like Amanda Karrh, who moved to East 52nd Street from Park Slope, Brooklyn, two years ago to live closer to her parents. “At first I thought the neighborhood was kind of generic,” said Ms. Karrh, 44, a television producer. “There is not a focal point. It’s not like there is one park where everyone hangs out. I miss that neighborhood feel.”

But the $4,000-a-month junior four she found had a window in the dining room so she could turn it into a cheerful bedroom for her son, who is now 5. As for the neighborhood, her perception has evolved. “It’s quiet, it’s off the beaten path, it’s not touristy,” she said. “I think I’m going to stay a while.”