Thirty years ago, People’s Daily, the newspaper of the ruling Communist Party, ran an article with the headline: “It’s good to have just one child; the government will support you in old age.”

This week, officials in Shanghai proclaimed that it would be “more suitable” to have two children, and issued an appeal to couples to have more. With one of the lowest fertility rates in China and the country’s fastest-aging population, the city is growing anxious about the demographic and social welfare challenges ahead, researchers say.

Under relaxed family planning rules put in place in Shanghai in early 2014, 90 percent of the city’s women of childbearing age are eligible to have a second child. But so far, only 5 percent have applied for permission to do so, said Fan Hua of the city’s Commission of Health and Family Planning during the recent annual meeting of the Shanghai People’s Congress, the Oriental Morning Post reported.

The newspaper said that the high cost of raising and educating a child and the fact that many young couples were struggling to juggle career and family had deterred them from becoming parents. Shanghai’s living costs are among the highest in China.

“Many in China, especially government officials, had a blind belief that China’s (and Shanghai’s) low fertility was mainly a result of the one-child policy,” Cai Yong, an assistant professor of sociology at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, who specializes in Chinese demography, said in an email. “More and more have come to realize that China’s low fertility goes together with other social revolutions happening inside Chinese families and society.”

The strict family planning policies that long restricted many urban couples to one child were put in place in the late 1970s in response to a surge in births that started in the 1950s. Couples who violated the birth limits could face fines and even forced abortions or sterilization. An exemption allowing a second child for couples who were themselves only children came into effect in 1984. The government decided to ease this further in late 2013, saying that localities could permit couples where only one partner was an only child to have a second baby.

As Shanghai and other cities loosened the rules for their residents, some braced for a baby boom. But far fewer eligible couples than expected have taken advantage of the new policy, giving rise to a different set of worries, and to Shanghai’s appeal.

The city’s fertility rate is one of the lowest in the world and has been declining since 1971, Mr. Cai wrote. The figure has been below replacement levels – the number of children born per woman needed to sustain a population – for more than four decades, he added.

The latest national census, in 2010, put Shanghai’s fertility rate at 0.74, the second lowest for a major city, after Beijing. The national rate was estimated to be 1.18.

A looming concern for China, as the country ages and fewer young people are available to enter the work force and contribute to the care of their parents and grandparents, is the welfare of the elderly, population experts said.

“The financial pressure on public budgets will become a larger and larger burden over time,” Mr. Cai wrote, “and the current pension system is clearly not sustainable.”

In 2012, the Shanghai government said the city had the largest percentage of elderly residents in China, with its “elderly population exceeding the national average by 8 to 10 percent” for years, the Shanghai news website Eastday.com reported.

By late 2011, the government said, 24.5 percent of the city’s residents were above the age of 60, and it predicted that the percentage would climb to nearly 30 percent by the end of 2015.

As early as 1979, Shanghai was an “aged city,” with 7 percent of its population over 65, 20 years ahead of China as a whole, according to the Shanghai Research Center on Aging.

He Yafu, an independent demographer, highlighted the fiscal dangers ahead. “Shanghai’s local population has been shrinking and is rapidly aging. Fewer young people means fewer payers to social welfare funds,” he said, adding that Shanghai “will struggle to make ends meet in its social welfare and pension funds.” He said that the city was increasingly relying on tax revenues from the migrant population to keep its social welfare system from collapsing.

But demographers warn that simply easing the family-planning policy will not be the magic bullet to bring an immediate turnaround in the birth rate and solve the aging crisis.

Liang Zhongtang, a demographer with the Shanghai Academy of Social Sciences who urged an end to the one-child policy as early as the 1980s, now favors the state’s retreat from dictating family size.

“I have now realized that the whole point is merely to return the basic rights of family planning to families,” Mr. Liang said in a telephone interview. “In fact, the Shanghai case has shown that whether people want to give birth or not has nothing to do with policies.”

Researchers said they expected a further relaxation of birth guidelines.

“It’s just a matter of time that China will lift all the current restrictions on the two-child policy” to allow anyone to have a second child, said Yang Juhua, a demography professor at the Renmin University in Beijing. “The government has long been studying it.”

The Shanghai Commission of Health and Family Planning did not respond to a faxed request for comment as of Thursday.

Shanghai’s call for couples to have a second child has drawn considerable comment online, with many mocking the authorities’ policy turnaround.

“Seems it won’t be long before the government starts fining those who only have one child,” one user said on Sina Weibo.