For years, those who moved to the Hudson Heights section of Washington Heights savored the fact that apartments could be bought at discounts as steep as the neighborhood’s hills, compared with much of the rest of Manhattan. And to find that affordable home, one didn’t have to give up good subway service — or, some joked, a 212 area code — in the process.

Harder to swallow for some, though, was that the neighborhood lacked amenities so many other parts of the borough took for granted: good restaurants, well-stocked groceries and even a place for a latte.

“Nothing was here,” said Mary Alice O’Connor, a 34-year resident transplanted from SoHo, referring to West 181st Street, a main commercial strip. “There was one old bar, and one old florist, and the rest was bodegas or closed.”

Ms. O’Connor, who teaches English and job skills to immigrants and paid $70,000 for a two-bedroom with a formal dining room, often had to stock up by driving to a Fairway Market in Harlem.

But the ridgetop area between Broadway and the Hudson River may be starting to look like elsewhere. West 181st has steadily filled in those empty storefronts over the years with what might be called modern-day signifiers of gentrification, like a Pilates studio, a bar that fills growler jugs with craft beer, and of course, a Starbucks. And next summer, the long-dingy George Washington Bridge Bus Station, after years of delays, is scheduled to complete a renovation that will include more than 100,000 new square feet of shops.

“It’s a good thing; it’s nice to have some variety,” said Craig Tessler, an administrative law judge, who last spring traded a rent-regulated one-bedroom in Chelsea for a prewar two-bedroom two-bath co-op in Hudson Heights. The unit, which has Art Deco details like a sunken living room, cost $540,000.

The area lacks good Chinese restaurants, he says, and he can no longer walk to Broadway theaters like he did downtown. But he enjoys the pasta at Saggio, on West 181st, he said.

Being near Manhattan’s northern tip also allows quick escapes, which Mr. Tessler likes because he drives to his house in Sullivan County on weekends. When he lived in Chelsea, it could take him an hour to make it out of the city, he said.

Some who move to Hudson Heights say they practically stumbled upon it, on a stroll through the area; the shared secret of the Brigadoon-like enclave explains why its community can seem so tightly knit, residents say.

“People talk to each other up here, and they do things together,” said Hikari Hathaway, an agent with Coldwell Banker Bellmarc who moved 27 years ago from a one-bedroom rental on the Lower East Side. Today, she lives in a four-bedroom, which she achieved by combining adjacent units, as apartments with more than two bedrooms are rare.

Whatever explains that camaraderie, it seemed evident on a recent afternoon, at a tag sale along Cabrini Boulevard outside the Castle Village co-op, as sellers of books, stuffed animals and glass bowls chatted amiably with passers-by, and one another.

“It’s a beautiful environment,” Ms. Hathaway said.

What You’ll Find

The name Hudson Heights wasn’t coined until 1993, when property owners banded together to spruce up streets and help bring in better quality stores, said Elizabeth Lorris Ritter, a founder of the Hudson Heights Owners Coalition, and its current president.

“We knew the name would be used by others, so we wanted to be thoughtful in our choices,” she said, adding that she occasionally uses Washington Heights, as other residents do.

The neighborhood stretches from Fort Tryon Park on the north to J. Hood Wright Park, Ms. Ritter said, based on the addresses of the coalition’s 35 member buildings. Its population is around 29,000, with the largest groups being white non-Hispanic residents, at 44 percent, and those of Hispanic origin, at 43 percent, according to 2010 census records. Buildings are almost uniformly prewar, many with six stories and decorations like vases and garlands on their facades.

What You’ll Pay

A search of StreetEasy.com earlier this month found 51 apartments for sale, at an average list price of $516,000. Units ranged from a studio in Lafayette Gardens, a postwar co-op by the George Washington Bridge, at $175,000, to a three-bedroom two-and-a-half-bath apartment in a prewar co-op on West 181st Street, which was $1.38 million. Co-ops predominate; condos are few. According to StreetEasy, in 2013, 244 co-ops sold in Hudson Heights, at an average price of $397,000, compared with 166 in 2012, at an average of $388,000. At the same time, more expensive listings emerged, with buyers from the Upper West Side and other neighborhoods sometimes paying more than $1 million for a two-bedroom, said Francisco Menendez, an agent with Halstead Property and a 14-year resident. “For them, it is almost a bargain,” he said.

Mr. Menendez said that one-bedrooms in rental buildings go for $1,700 to $2,000 a month, or a bit more if they are sublets in co-ops. Studios are about $1,400, he said; two-bedrooms, $3,000.

What to Do

Through the gate at Fort Tryon Park, a path shaded by elms arcs along the three-acre Heather Garden. From the spot, which was designed by the sons of Frederick Law Olmsted, one of the designers of Central Park, the Palisades cliffs of New Jersey can be glimpsed. The park’s gem is the Cloisters Museum and Gardens, where the Metropolitan Museum of Art shows off its medieval European collection.

The Cabrini Repertory Theater, on Fort Washington Avenue, hosts three playwright festivals a year. Le Cheile, the three-year-old Irish restaurant and bar that fills those growlers — pronounced “le KAY-la,” which means “together” in Gaelic — occasionally hosts Irish music in its multilevel space.

Frank’s Market, a gourmet grocery on West 187th, another lively retail drag, carries everything from sushi to apples to organic cereal. Broadway is a hodgepodge of fast-food chains, tiny markets and the occasional drugstore; the neon-bright signage can seem kaleidoscopic.

Tenants announced for the renovated bus station, which fronts on several streets, so far include Marshalls, a Fine Fare Supermarket, a Gap outlet, Blink Fitness and a Buffalo Wild Wings Grill and Bar, said Stephen McBride, a principal with SJM Partners, part of the development team. The stores are scheduled to open by next summer, he said.

The station will also be home to mom-and-pops like Café Buunni, a tiny coffee shop already on Pinehurst Avenue. The doorway of its current location was recently jammed with ads, for tutors, daily meditation sessions and a “birth stories” event at Bread and Yoga in Inwood.

The Schools

Parents rave about how the cream-brick Public School/Intermediate School 187 is the rare city school that combines kindergarten through eighth grade under one roof. On the 2013 state exams, 43 percent of its third-graders met standards in English, versus 28 percent citywide. In math, 46 percent met standards, versus 33 percent citywide. The school, with about 770 students, received an A on its most recent report card.

For high school, a close-by option is City College Academy of the Arts, on Broadway near Inwood. SAT averages there in 2013 were 409 in reading, 442 math and 407 writing, versus 437, 463 and 433 citywide. It also got an A.

The Commute

The A train serves the area, with stops at West 181st and West 190th Streets. Midtown is about 25 minutes away. The M98 express bus stops on Fort Washington Avenue on weekdays, winding up on Lexington Avenue in the East 60’s.

The History

The stucco-walled 1905 cottage hidden in the trees by the entrance to 67-acre Fort Tryon Park is a remnant of a massive estate called Tryon Hall, owned by C.G.K. Billings, an industrialist. The cottage was the home of a gatekeeper.