WASHINGTON — Republicans entered the final weekend before the midterm elections clearly holding the better hand to control the Senate and poised to add to their House majority. But a decidedly sour electorate and a sizable number of undecided voters added a measure of suspense.

The final drama surrounded the Senate, which has been a Democratic bulwark for President Obama since his party lost its House majority in 2010. Republicans need to gain six seats to seize the Senate, and officials in both parties believe there is a path for them to win at least that many.

Yet the races for a number of seats that will decide the majority remained close, polls showed, prompting Republicans to pour additional money into get-out-the-vote efforts in Alaska, Georgia and Iowa. Democrats were doing the same in Colorado, where they were concerned because groups that tend to favor Republicans voted early in large numbers, and in Iowa.

While an air of mystery hung over no fewer than nine Senate races, the only question surrounding the House was how many seats Republicans would add. If they gain a dozen seats, it will give them an advantage not seen since 1948 and potentially consign the Democrats to minority status until congressional redistricting in the 2020s.

In a sign of a worsening climate, Democratic officials shifted money to incumbents in once-safe districts around Las Vegas and Santa Barbara, Calif. And over the weekend, they put more money toward television ads in districts held by Democrats in Iowa and Minnesota, including that of longtime Representative Collin C. Peterson of Minnesota. Though there are fewer competitive House seats than in past elections because of gerrymandering, party strategists were still airing ads in 40 districts.

“It’s a grim environment,” said Representative Steve Israel of New York, the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. Mr. Israel was spending the weekend pleading with his caucus to contribute to imperiled colleagues to minimize losses. Trying to soften the blow, he noted that losses were expected: The party in control of the White House has lost an average of 29 seats in midterm elections in the last century.

Just two years after he won a second term by a commanding margin, Mr. Obama has kept his distance from the most pivotal congressional races. On Saturday, he was to address a heavily African-American crowd in Detroit to bolster Michigan’s Democratic nominee for governor.

Senate Republicans are confident. A senior party official called Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the minority leader, on Saturday at his Louisville home and, after running through voting projections, told Mr. McConnell that he would be the next majority leader. Mr. McConnell’s initial reaction was only a long pause.

Republican hopes were lifted by a new Des Moines Register poll Saturday showing Joni Ernst, their Iowa Senate nominee, taking a seven-point lead in a race for a Democratic-held seat. Yet, the lead is within the poll’s margin of sampling error of plus or minus 4 percentage points.

But Republicans conceded that voters were hardly embracing them. “It’s not as though people have all a sudden fallen in love with Republicans,” said Senator John Cornyn of Texas, the second-ranking Senate Republican. “It’s just a loss of confidence in the administration. It’s national security, personal security and job security. People are on edge. And that’s not good if you’re the party in power.”

Other Republicans were restrained in their predictions for Tuesday, given the large number of undecided voters in key Senate races, growing questions about the reliability of polling and respect for the Democrats’ ability to turn out voters.

“We have seen how money, big data and enhanced turnout operations can impact the actual result compared to a poll, but I believe the Democrats will largely lose the Romney states in play and lose the Senate,” said Bill McInturff, a longtime Republican pollster.

The National Republican Senatorial Committee held a conference call Friday with lawyers and aides to candidates in close races to discuss potential recounts. It will have a chartered jet waiting on Tuesday to fly wherever a contest is close enough to be disputed.

Democrats said they hoped the uncertainty would resolve in their favor. “In most elections, by two days beforehand, you can sort of tell what’s going to happen; you can feel the winds blowing,” said Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York. “This one is real close, and there are countervailing forces on both sides.”

That was evident in the races for governor as well, with Republicans on the offensive in some liberal states but struggling to defend some of their incumbents in conservative-leaning states.

With only 27 percent of Americans saying the country is headed in the right direction, according to a CBS News poll released last week, voters are in an angst-ridden mood that is cutting against the Democrats.

Keith Wilson, 59, a Republican from suburban Denver who said he had sometimes supported Democrats, has already sent in his ballot. He voted for the Republicans and said he viewed the election as a referendum on the White House.

“It’s a real nervous time that we’re having,” Mr. Wilson said, ticking off the country’s problems and skewering the president. “It’s like everything is a reaction, instead of pro-action.” But as he sat at a Denver cafe, he made it clear that his vote was no endorsement of the Republicans. “I took the best of the two evils,” he said.

Representative David E. Price, Democrat of North Carolina and a political scientist, said: “People aren’t yet feeling economically secure. And you pile onto that this incredible list of international crises and the concerted Republican effort to hang those problems around the president’s neck, and you have your explanation.”

In their closing ads, some Republicans sought to leverage this unease.

David Perdue, the Republican candidate for the open Senate seat in Georgia, sought to link his opponent, Michelle Nunn, to Mr. Obama with an ad showing them together below an image of people in hazmat suits. A narrator warned of “terrorism and Ebola coming at us from overseas.”

The Georgia race illustrates why Republicans’ prospects for taking over the Senate are good, but not certain. While Ms. Nunn has run a strong race, the seat — held by Senator Saxby Chambliss, a Republican who is retiring — is likely to be decided in a January runoff, as neither she nor Mr. Perdue is expected to receive a majority on Tuesday.

But as the two parties prepared for their final push, thousands of votes had already been cast. In Morrow, Ga., an Atlanta suburb, Alonzo Jackson said Friday afternoon that weeks of radio ads and a sense of history had helped him “commit.” He voted for Democrats.

Senate Democrats’ best hope may be their field organization. In the last week, volunteers and staff members have knocked on 1.1 million doors and made 2.6 million phone calls, according to party officials.

House Democrats, however, have slipped among many independents and older voters in recent weeks.

“It’s very tough terrain,” Mr. Israel acknowledged.