Last week's column discussed the Southern Weekend censorship mess. The incident appears to have fizzled with no significant retreat by the censors or penalties for the journalists involved. A recent podcast, whose guests include Ian Johnson of The New York Times Beijing bureau, provides a good overview of the resolution and possible ramifications of the story.

China's stock market cares more about recent data and regulatory signals than the issues raised by the Southern Weekend incident. On Monday, it jumped 3.1 percent following positive economic data and reports that the government will allow a huge new influx of foreign capital in the market.

On Friday, the government reported that China's exports surged 14.1 percent in December, far above the consensus estimates. Goldman Sachs, UBS, ANZ Bank and other researchers suggested the data was unreliable.

Last week, ANZ Bank economists published a report that used "Benford's law" to question the accuracy of Chinese gross domestic product data over the last 20 years. Jim Walker of Asianomics explained in a video why investors should also question the quality of upcoming economic data for January and February given the distortions that will arise from the Chinese New Year, which falls on Feb. 10.

In December, this column looked at eight trends to keep an eye in 2013. Two of those trends were related to the environment. Over the last several days, China has experienced its worst air pollution in decades, with the pollution index in several cities, including Beijing, literally off the charts. As bad as the pollution has been, the "London smog disaster" of 1952 was much worse.

State media coverage of the crisis has been remarkably aggressive, with front-page news in most newspapers and long discussions on major TV news programs about the risks of the pollution, the causes and the emergency steps the government is taking.

Investors see opportunity in the pollution crisis, as environmental stocks were among the biggest gainers on China's stock market on Monday.

The Global Times, a tabloid newspaper that is an arm of The People's Daily, published a noteworthy editorial, first in the Chinese edition and subsequently in the English edition. The Global Times writes that:

China's pollution is accumulating. Although measures against pollution have had some effect, the seriousness of this problem has not alleviated...

However, recent atmospheric pollution has really sounded a warning to us: if we continue this way of development instead of adjusting it, the long-term damage will be serious.

The public should understand the importance of development as well as the critical need to safeguard the bottom line of the environmental pollution. The choice between development and environment protection should be made by genuinely democratic methods.

This editorial is a change from "Masking the Pollution," which appeared in the Oct.12, 2011, edition of The Global Times:

"The suggestion to wear masks will make trouble out of nothing, as we've had polluted air for a long time, and we shouldn't be living with an American standard," said an anonymous doctor at the People's Hospital of Peking University, who specializes in respiratory diseases.

Given the media coverage over the last few days, many Chinese seem to have decided there is not an "American" or a "Chinese" standard for pollution, there is just pollution.

Clearly, it is impossible to pretend that the air is not polluted, but the new government may be using the aggressive reporting to demonstrate a commitment to transparency and accountability as well as use this crisis to further the difficult reforms toward a more sustainable development model.

The world had better hope China can fix its environmental problems, as pollution does not stop at China's borders.

NOR DOES INTERNET CENSORSHIP, as we learned last week when Tencent was caught censoring certain keywords globally. A handful of overseas users of its wildly popular mobile SNS service WeChat reported they were blocked from sending some messages. Tencent blamed a technical glitch when it admitted that a small number of users outside China had experienced problems.

The December column about eight trends to watch in 2013 also highlighted Chinese firms expanding internationally and specifically noted that Tencent's WeChat might give Facebook a run for its money in emerging markets. But extending outside China the censorship that it is required to perform inside China may threaten its international prospects.

Chinese electronics firms are looking to move aggressively into the American market. Huawei, HiSense, Haier and TCL all had a huge presence at the recent Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas. TCL followed its C.E.S. splash by buying its way into Hollywood. The firm paid more than $5 million to license the naming rights to the famous Grauman's Chinese Theater.

Baidu has made an aggressive move into Africa and the Middle East through a partnership with the mobile carrier France Telecom/Orange to distribute the Baidu mobile browser on Android smartphones sold in those regions. According to TechCrunch:

Orange will also be using Baidu's user interface - which opens with a page of icons linking to web apps - to promote a selection of services it endorses, such as Wikipedia and Facebook . . .

Facebook of course is blocked in China. Chinese Internet firms going abroad are learning that international localization requires different standards for censorship.