PARIS — Nicky Bailey and Nadja Saralam were not among the top finishers in the 2013 Peking to Paris Motor Challenge when they reached the checkered flag at the magnificent Place Vendôme here earlier this month. However, they managed to impress everyone with their feat of driving an open-topped 100-year-old automobile 7,610 miles, negotiating harsh terrain and weather in the process.

The Perth, Australia-based pair drove their 1913 Ford Model T into the City of Light after a grueling monthlong journey that had commenced in Beijing on May 28. The rally, originally held in 1907 and previously re-enacted in 1997, 2007 and 2010 by the Endurance Rally Association, featured multiple classes of classic and vintage cars.

“Everyone thought we might have had a tough trip,” said Mr. Bailey, who found the car in pieces two years ago at an auction in Queensland. “On the contrary, we had a great time as this car is so simple and easy to work on. Any problem we wanted to fix could be done very quickly.”

For example, they found a quick solution when their car sustained front spring damage in Mongolia.

“We replaced it with a piece of wood, which did the job for three hours,” he said. “By then we managed to make it to a garage where we found leaf springs.”

Ms. Saralam, who served as Mr. Bailey’s co-driver, said that on a downhill with a bit of a tail-wind, the car reached a top speed of just over 50 miles an hour.

“Our car wasn’t the fastest but it was reliable and comfortable,” she said. “The chassis is made of special steel. In Mongolia, people driving behind us thought we were driving a moon buggy as the chassis would twist and turn according to the terrain while we would be perfectly still in the middle.

“The other good thing about this car was that it doesn’t have a roof,” Ms. Saralam said. “We could smell the earth and feel as if we were part of the amazing landscapes that unfolded before us every single day. We were snowed upon, had to brave hail and the sun. All this made the drive even more fun. The ones driving cars with roofs saw their entire trip as though they were looking through a TV.”

Mr. Bailey said it took him nine months to prepare the car, which involved rebuilding the engine with a new crankshaft, carburetor and pistons. He also built the body, which is a replica of the Model T that participated in the New York to Seattle race in 1909.

“All the mechanical parts are original. The only modern components are the rear disc brakes which were purely for safety reasons,” he said.

Of course, driving a 100-year-old car wasn’t easy.

“I had blisters and sore shoulders because of constantly holding the steering,” Mr. Bailey said. “We had problems going downhill due to braking issues, because of which we had to go around some of the big passes.”

Ms. Saralam remarked that they had chosen a Model T with no roof because they wanted to get as close as possible to the experience the original racers had. “I think that’s the spirit of this race,” she said.

Surprisingly, Mr. Bailey and Ms. Saralam packed all the luggage, spare parts and tools they needed in the car’s small baggage space.

“We didn’t carry lot of clothes,” Ms. Saralam said. “Every day, I was wearing the same set of clothes, which I would wash in the hotel the previous evening.”

Mongolian terrain was the toughest of all, she said.

“We suffered suspension damage, while other cars had troubles there, too,” she said. “Generally speaking, Mongolia implants a fungus in your car which doesn’t show up until you have reached further into Europe. But the initial damage is done in Mongolia.”

The Model T was the oldest among the 100 cars that participated in the rally, but it wasn’t the only one that attracted attention from the sizable crowd that had gathered at the event’s conclusion. A 1917 La France Tourer with a monstrous 14.5-liter engine was one of the more notable cars.

The rally may be over, but Ms. Saralam said she was ready to get on the road again.

“I would love to jump in the Model T and drive back to Beijing,” she said.