Times Insider delivers behind-the-scenes insights into how news, features and opinion come together at The New York Times. In this piece, Josh Haner, a staff photographer and senior editor for photo technology, takes us to the Tengger Desert on a recent assignment for a continuing series about climate change.

The scenery is breathtaking, but I feel helpless: We’re a half-hour drive from where we need to be, and the sunset means that my assignment — along with the limited time left on my visa — is slipping away from me.

The truth is, the drivers here aren’t accustomed to journalists. Their usual customers are tourists looking for a roller-coaster ride through the dunes — which explains the death metal blasting from the radio and what seems to be a broken axle. The music should have been my first clue.

But now, halfway to Moon Lake, we’re watching the sun go down, and I’m missing the opportunity to make the picture.

Getting here wasn’t easy: a 14-hour red-eye flight to Beijing, a two-hour plane ride to Yinchuan (after a series of cancellations and delays because of summer thunderstorms — along with a four-hour nap in an airport hotel), a two-hour drive to the edge of the Tengger, and a rapid price negotiation to get a dune-capable vehicle.

Making the pictures hasn’t proved easy, either. For traveling purposes, I had brought along a relatively small drone, and I knew it would be a trade-off: Smaller and lighter means it is more susceptible to being swept up in a windstorm, which would make the footage unusable. We also have to get very creative when launching and landing the drone to ensure minimal sand exposure. I’d already ruined one in an assignment months before by getting sand in the motor. I couldn’t risk having that happen so early in this trip to China.

How did I end up here? We’d chosen this exact spot, from back in New York, months earlier. A group of editors on the graphics desk and I had sat down with a map of the Tengger, after hearing suggestions from Edward Wong, the Beijing bureau chief. We were looking for communities along the edge that might be affected by the desert’s changing footprint.

Jeremy White, a graphics editor at The Times, analyzed satellite data to determine three communities where the desert seemed to be encroaching. Our challenge was to find a story there. Was desertification impacting people in these locations? If so, how?

What Edward, the writer on the piece, and I found was eye-opening: stories of people having to change their livelihoods, of farmers trying to supplement lost incomes by catering more to tourists, of families resettling and sending their children to cities in hopes that they would succeed in a new industry.

One of the ways to capture the extent of the change — and the emotional heft of these stories — was to rise above the desert with a drone.

Our replacement car eventually arrives, and a new death metal song crackles out of the speakers. Unfortunately, we’ve missed the light for the evening; we’ll have to try again at sunrise — which means sleeping among the dunes.

That light is stunning the next morning as we bounce back across the sand, and I finally have time to film what I need for the story.

Then, by what seems like a miracle, we notice a 4G cellular signal, so I tether our drone to Facebook Live and share the flying experience with our readers (a task made ever more difficult by the fact that Facebook is blocked in China).

Up next? We’re off to another part of China for the next story in the series — and for many more challenging modes of transportation.