The World’s 50 Best Restaurants announced its list for 2015 on Monday night in London, amid news that the ceremony would be moved to New York City in 2016, and in the face of increasingly loud criticism of its voting methodology.

El Celler de Can Roca in Spain was named the No. 1 restaurant, reclaiming its position from Noma in Copenhagen, which dropped to No. 3, its lowest ranking since 2009. Chef Dan Barber’s rustic idyll north of New York City, Blue Hill at Stone Barns, cracked the list at No. 49, while Central in Lima, Peru, entered the top 10 for the first time.

Eleven Madison Park in New York remained in the top 10, and Le Bernardin, Per Se, the French Laundry, Nomad, Saison and the Restaurant at Meadowood also held steady.

But over all, American restaurants lost stature. The only new American restaurant on the long list was Estela in New York City, at No. 90. Alinea in Chicago fell to No. 26 from No. 9. Daniel in New York City dropped to 80 from 40, and Coi in San Francisco to 75 from 49, with Manresa in Los Gatos, Calif., squeaking in at No. 100, down from No. 62. Jean-Georges, Momofuku Ssam Bar and Marea all fell off the list altogether.

The list showed a marked increase in global reach, adding restaurants in India, Dubai, Korea, Russia and South Africa. Restaurants in Latin America and Asia — regions where the 50 Best has robust separate awards programs — continued to add entries. Last year, there were 12 restaurants from those regions in the top 50; for 2015, there are 16.

Hélène Darroze won the Veuve Cliquot World’s Best Female Chef award, though none of her restaurants has ever appeared on the list. No restaurant run by a woman has ever appeared on the top 50, though some women who work with male partners have been on the list.

The French chef Joël Robuchon’s restaurant in the 7th Arrondissement of Paris, L’ Atelier de Joël Robuchon, fell to No. 63 from No. 31. Mr. Robuchon is a critic of the list, saying it wields too much influence, given what he described as its flawed voting process.

Many chefs have long criticized the awards privately, saying that the judging is arbitrary, not credible and susceptible to corruption. They say that the scales are tipped when some governments sponsor free trips and meals for journalists while others do not; when chefs and restaurateurs make up a third of the voters; and when judges are not required to prove that they have eaten in the restaurants for which they cast ballots.

Last week, after a petition posted by a French group called Occupy 50 Best began to draw signatures, some chefs decided to go public with their objections.

The scope and influence of the 50 Best list has ballooned since it was first published in Britain in 2002 by the trade magazine Restaurant, making it the go-to food guide for globe-trotting gastronomes.

The group that administers the awards collects millions of dollars annually in sponsorships from global food and drink brands including San Pellegrino and Veuve Clicquot, and from national governments including those of Peru and Singapore.

Mr. Robuchon criticized the list in an email to The New York Times on Sunday, saying there is no way to determine if voters have even eaten in the restaurants for which they have cast ballots.

“Voters are supposed to have eaten in the restaurants they vote for at least once in the preceding 18 months,” he said. “But no proof of their visit, no expense bill is required, and I know for a fact that this is a major loophole in the process. It gives free rein to the worst maneuvers — cronyism, ‘flip a coin’ voting, geopolitical influence and lobbying.”

Mr. Robuchon, who has had a restaurant on the list every year and who used to be a member of the jury, said he did not object to the idea of such rankings, but that 50 Best had too much influence given what he described as its sloppy verification process.

This year, 50 Best retained the consulting firm Deloitte to scrutinize and reinforce certain aspects of its voting procedure, but the head of the 50 Best organization, William Drew, said that there were no plans to change the system.

“We take our responsibility very seriously and strive to make the voting system as robust as possible.” Mr. Drew said in a statement on Monday. “The list is created from the votes of almost 1,000 independent experts from across the world. Neither the organizers, nor any of the sponsors, can vote or influence the voting or the results.”