The problem with issue books (bibliotherapy, as some people call them) is that they can introduce new anxieties. Not every 5-year-old thinks about going to school for the first time and worries, “What if my teacher doesn’t like me?” So it is refreshing to see books that treat the school day as a wonderful adventure, and let kids cozy up to the idea by allowing other sorts of creatures — like pigs and grown-ups — make initial forays into that new environment on their behalf.

“Rufus Goes to School," by Kim T. Griswell, with illustrations by Valerie Gorbachev, is so charming it could be enjoyed at any time of year. But this tale of a piglet’s bid to get an education is perfect for September. When he presents himself at school, Rufus trots down the hall to the principal’s office, where he is told, unequivocally, “No pigs in school!” “Why not?” asks Rufus, and the principal lists all the naughty and disruptive things a pig would do in school if he were allowed to attend — playing leapfrog in the classroom, starting food fights in the cafeteria, and turning drawings into airplanes. But the piglet tries again and again, until he is, of course, finally admitted.

Griswell’s storytelling has just the right amount of repetition and predictability, like a catchy song. There’s a pleasure in hearing the principal say, as expected, that the pig’s backpack (and later his lunchbox, then his blanket) “make no difference” — the pig still can’t attend. And Gorbachev’s pen, ink and watercolor pictures are timelessly appealing: richly colored, with soft, sketchy lines and funny details. Though this Ukrainian-born illustrator’s style is his own, it brings to mind Garth Williams, David McPhail and Maurice Sendak.

The young narrator of “The Day My Mom Came to Kindergarten," by Maureen Fergus, with illustrations by Mike Lowery, announces that she liked school “from the very first day. It was better than a dinosaur museum, a circus and a super-duper mega-three-scooper ice-cream sundae.” Her mother, however, seems to have mixed feelings, ”a little sad that I was growing up and starting to have adventures without her.” So her daughter invites her into class. But in a funny role switch, Mom isn’t quite sure how to behave, and embarrasses her daughter thoroughly: she shouts out answers, doesn’t clean up after making a mess, and forgets to use her indoor voice in the library.

Fergus’s light humor keeps the story amusing rather that instructive (most kids catch on to that kind of hidden lesson pretty quickly), and Mike Lowery’s simple, full-page illustrations make the most of the silly action. It’s a rare picture book that shows a mother frowning as furiously as this one does when, having trouble with scissors during Craft Time, she makes “a loud huffy noise” and slams them down on the table.

As Rufus the pig knows, the great thing about going to school is learning to read, and these books are a reminder of what a delight that can be, for parents and children together or independently.