Much has been made of how Andy Warhol’s glam-pop approach to everyday objects and celebrities transformed the American art world, but less has been known about how a 1963 drive from New York to Los Angeles inspired the artist’s personal metamorphosis. “Before this he was called Raggedy Andy,” said Deborah Davis, author of “The Trip,” which examines Warhol’s journey. “He dressed in chinos. He was tongue-tied. He was searching for what he should paint. Then he took this trip and realized he had to package himself differently. He dressed in black. He opened the Factory. This was when he became Warhol.”

Having never traveled cross-country herself, Ms. Davis, 63, said she recognized that she “didn’t know what the landscape looked like,” and recreated the artist’s road trip. Below are edited excerpts from a conversation with Ms. Davis.

Q. How did you replicate Warhol’s itinerary?

A. I had an amazing gift from the Warhol museum — his receipts. He saved everything. I knew exactly where he went, what he bought, where he ate.

Why did he drive instead of fly?

Part of him was afraid to fly even though he had flown before. There was a famous plane crash before his trip. His mother was very opposed to him flying. There was also something in the air, in the zeitgeist, that made him want to take a road trip. I can’t tell you how prevalent they were at the time, from Jack Kerouac to the TV show “Route 66,” which was filmed on location. Everywhere you looked you were being told go see the U.S.A. I think that was part of it.

What was the route?

The route that we both took was to go from New York to St. Louis, where we picked up Route 66. Then we traveled through Kansas, Oklahoma, Texas, New Mexico, Arizona and California.

What did Warhol take with him? What did you?

Andy packed his brand-new movie camera. Not his art supplies, his camera. He packed about 50 magazines. And he packed his tuxedo because he knew he was going to a big event in L.A. — a retrospective of Marcel Duchamp’s work.

When it was time for me to pack for my trip, I had very strict rules. All of the reading material had to be from 1963. I had all of the magazines that he had, McCall’s, the fan magazines. All the music had to be from 1963 so we listened to songs like “Be My Baby” and artists like the Beach Boys. I insisted that we roll down the windows so we could feel what it was like without air-conditioning. That didn’t last.

You write about Jack Rittenhouse’s guide to Route 66, which was the first guidebook to the highway. Did Warhol follow it? Did you?

It didn’t turn up in Warhol’s artifacts so I doubt it. I thought Rittenhouse was amazing. I loved his rule of the road that says you should stop at the roadside cafes where the most trucks are parked out front because you can be certain to find a good cup of coffee.

Did you follow that rule?

Absolutely. That was how we found the Midpoint Diner [in Adrian, Tex.], where we had breakfast. Steinbeck said breakfast was the best American meal when you’re on the road. He’s absolutely right. It’s all about beginnings, a new day, a new stretch of the highway.

What surprised you?

There were no Americans on Route 66. It was all foreigners. They’ve all come to see the quintessential America. They’re all looking for America, but Americans aren’t. I think it should be mandatory that everyone drive cross-country. Even though every city has a Starbucks and the big towns are alike, you still get those glimpses of something more authentic. You really experience America.

Where would you like to go again?

Pittsburgh. It was the most amazing city. It is both polished and scarred. It has a cultural center that you get from having Carnegie this and Carnegie that. The food scene is enough to keep you fat and happy. And you have the Andy Warhol Museum. It’s an incredible combination.