MOSCOW — Two months after a failed summit meeting with President Trump, North Korea’s leader, Kim Jong-un, met on Thursday with President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia, as Mr. Kim tries to rally international support for an approach to sanctions relief and gradual nuclear disarmament that the Trump administration opposes.

Mr. Kim’s visit to the Pacific port city of Vladivostok, Russia, is his first trip abroad since February, when he and Mr. Trump met with much fanfare in Vietnam, only to see negotiations end abruptly, amid mutual recriminations, without any progress toward an agreement.

“The whole world’s attention is focused on the issue on the Korean peninsula,” Mr. Kim told Mr. Putin as he called for “meaningful dialogue today” on the issue.

The meeting started late after Mr. Kim’s motorcade was delayed for unclear reasons. Rossiya 24, a Russian state news channel, reported that Mr. Putin had flown by helicopter to the venue and was expecting Mr. Kim to arrive by limousine.

The two planned to first meet one-on-one with only translators present, and later with an official delegation from each country. Mr. Putin greeted Mr. Kim by congratulating him on winning a recent election in North Korea, and Mr. Kim in turn complimented Mr. Putin on winning an election in Russia last year.

After the summit meeting, Mr. Putin planned to fly to Beijing for a conference on China’s Belt and Road investment program, the Russian news media reported.

At the February talks in Vietnam, in Hanoi, the capital, Mr. Trump had proposed a “big deal” to lift punishing economic sanctions in return for a quick and complete elimination of North Korea’s nuclear weapons program. Mr. Kim offered, instead, only a partial dismantling of nuclear facilities — while keeping his arsenal of nuclear warheads and missiles — in exchange for relief from the most harmful sanctions.

North Korea has since grown increasingly frustrated with Washington, conducting a weapons test and accusing Mr. Trump’s national security adviser, John R. Bolton, and Secretary of State Mike Pompeo of sabotaging the Kim-Trump nuclear negotiations. Mr. Kim said he was willing to meet Mr. Trump again, but only if the United States made a new proposal that the North could accept by the end of the year.

A recent report by the United Nations sanctions committee has accused Russia of helping North Korea circumvent international sanctions through illegal ship-to-ship transfers of oil and coal.

But there is doubt over Russia’s ability to ease the pain of sanctions for North Korea.

Moscow is obligated to honor the United Nations sanctions it has voted for. And North Korea and Russia share a short border, precluding the kind of widespread smuggling believed to be taking place on the border between the North and China. Mr. Kim has met China’s president, Xi Jinping, four times as he sought help from China, his country’s biggest trading partner, which accounts for more than 93 percent of the North’s external trade.

By securing a meeting with Mr. Putin this week, Mr. Kim sought to reaffirm his image as a global player despite the failure to reach an agreement with Mr. Trump in Hanoi. His meeting with Mr. Putin also sent a signal to Washington that Mr. Kim was expanding his diplomatic chess game.

“If perception is indeed reality, North Korea has come to be perceived as now a player in Northeast Asia, meaning Kim’s carefully calibrated P.R. offensive is working — much to Washington’s dismay,” said Harry J. Kazianis, the director of Korean studies at the Center for the National Interest, a research institute in Washington.

“And in the long run,” Mr. Kazianis said, “such a strategy could very well pay off, if Kim is no longer perceived as a threat, leading eventually to a weakened sanctions regime.”

Both Russia and China have supported American-led sanctions against the North at the United Nations Security Council, but at the same time have provided the North with a buffer against American pressure. They support the North’s argument that the United States and North Korea should resolve their differences in “a step-by-step approach” by trading security guarantees for North Korean actions toward complete denuclearization.

With talks with Washington now stalled, Mr. Kim may align his country more closely with Beijing, Moscow or both, in much the same way as the United States tried to bring Seoul and Tokyo together to jointly deter China’s ascendancy and combat a nuclear North Korea.

If Mr. Kim concludes that his two-way diplomacy with Mr. Trump is in vain, he may play off Mr. Putin’s desire to increase his own influence in Asia. Japanese news outlets reported this week that during his meeting with Mr. Kim, Mr. Putin could call for the reopening of so-called six-party talks on the North’s nuclear disarmament.

But any attempt to revive these talks, which would include China, Russia and Japan as well as the United States and North and South Korea, could be bad news for Mr. Trump.

Before the discussions collapsed in 2009, the six-party talks had produced denuclearization deals, but they were later abrogated. Mr. Trump has repeatedly cited the talks as a prime example of how the past administrations’ dealings with North Korea failed and how his own leader-to-leader diplomacy with Mr. Kim stood a far better chance of bringing about Pyongyang’s denuclearization.

Conspicuously absent from Mr. Kim’s entourage on Wednesday, the North Korean state media reported, was Kim Yong-chol, who has been the country’s point man responsible for coordinating Kim-Trump diplomacy. Kim Yong-chol’s absence came days after the North demanded that Washington remove Mr. Pompeo from the United States negotiating team.

Other veterans of the six-party talks, including Choe Son-hui, North Korea’s vice foreign minister, accompanied Mr. Kim to Vladivostok.

Mr. Putin previously held a summit meeting with Mr. Kim’s father and predecessor, Kim Jong-il, in 2002. Kim Jong-il also met in 2011 with Dmitri A. Medvedev, Russia’s president at the time.