‘‘Because DocuTV will soon start broadcasting on satellite, programs in local dialect can’t go on and ‘Shanghai Dialect Talk’ will close. Thank you everyone for your support! I’m grateful!’’

That message last Tuesday on the Sina Weibo account of Gao Bowen provoked an outcry among people in Shanghai. Mr. Gao is a television host and performer of pingtan, a traditional Shanghai art form that includes telling jokes and stories, singing and playing music, and the end of his program stirred fears that the city’s unique language and traditions are in peril.

Satellite television is broadcast nationally, and government regulations bar the use of local dialects on national television. In January, the State Administration of Press, Publication, Radio, Film and Television issued a notice saying that all television and radio programs must use Mandarin Chinese, the standard national language, and avoid local dialects and foreign languages, China Daily reported. This policy has its critics, who say that while the central government is promoting what it calls ‘‘culture industries’’ at home and abroad, it is discouraging China’s own rich array of regional dialects and customs out of concern that strong local identities could challenge Beijing’s authority.

“This is going to be such a pity for us,’’ said Qi Jiayao, a call center employee who has campaigned to spread the use of the Shanghai dialect, which he says is under threat from the large influx of newcomers to the city who don’t speak it as well as the erosion of traditional ways of living. ‘‘Media plays a very crucial role in maintaining a language. If we have programs in the local dialect, it’s something living among us all. In order to keep a language alive it needs to be in the public sphere, not just the private sphere.’’

Since Jan. 1, Mr. Gao, 44, had hosted “Shanghai Dialect Talk,’’ a prime-time Monday-to-Friday, half-hour talk show on Shanghai Television. Images on the show’s verified Sina Weibo account showed traditional barbers, furniture, houses, musical performances and early 20th-century dress. The show’s slogan: “Not just a show! An attitude to life!”

Mr. Qi said the show was the latest of three in the Shanghai dialect to be canceled since last fall. The other two were a news show and a Mandarin-language television drama dubbed in Shanghainese but halted after just a few of the 20 scheduled episodes.

In February, China Daily reported that the main character in a popular television show about an elderly Shanghainese busybody ‘‘switched to using broken Mandarin, rather than his signature colloquial and idiomatic Shanghai dialect,’’ to comply with state regulations.

DocuTV is a channel of Shanghai Television, which is part of the state-owned Shanghai Media Group. On Friday, a spokeswoman for Shanghai Television who gave her name as Ms. Chen confirmed that the show had been dropped because DocuTV was applying to become a satellite channel. ‘‘According to Chinese laws,’’ she said, ‘‘you cannot use dialects on satellite channels in order to make it easier for other people to understand.’’

On the Sina Weibo account of the Shanghai Times newspaper, there was much disappointment.

‘‘Shanghai Dialect Talk is a really good program! These last years’ efforts to push Mandarin in Shanghai have really been effective. Why do they need to exterminate dialects!!!’’ wrote one commenter called Goldfish in the Grass.

Another post began: ‘‘Spread this with grief and indignation!’’ It repeated the news, then ended, ‘‘Online friends are expressing their discomfort and anger at the ending of the show.’’

Several commenters drew comparisons with what they called a more permissive situation in Guangdong Province, where they said tens of millions of Cantonese speakers are able to watch television shows in their dialect.

‘‘This is like news of a death. I hope it proves to be just a rumor,’’ another commenter wrote.

China has a ‘‘fantastic linguistic diversity,’’ said Steve Hansen, the Beijing-based co-founder of Phonemica, a website that aims to document and preserve hundreds of local languages and dialects in China.

‘‘In some ways Shanghainese is doing quite well in comparison to other Sinitic languages,’’ he said. ‘‘Shanghainese have a lot of pride in their language and many make an effort to pass it on to the next generation.’’

Some parts of the government are trying to preserve local dialects, he said. ‘‘Obviously there are policies like the broadcasting policy that take away from the influence of local dialects. On the other hand, there is certainly government-funded academic research for dialects. And for every poster about the need to use Putonghua’’ — the Chinese word for standard Mandarin — ‘‘we can find a high-level official talking about the need to preserve mother tongues.’’

But over all, he said, regional languages are endangered, as are local cultures.

‘‘Much of the threat in China is the same as it is around the world,’’ he said. ‘‘People moving around, wanting their children to speak the language of commerce and ‘progress.’ Even without any additional government policies, this pressure would be tremendous.’’