HILLSDALE, N.Y.

WHAT: A contemporary farmhouse with four bedrooms and four-and-a-half bathrooms

HOW MUCH: $1,100,000

SIZE: 3,661 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $300

SETTING: Hillsdale is a rural town in Columbia County, about two and a half hours north of New York City, where the Berkshires meet the Hudson Valley. The landscape is rolling and veined by creeks and streams. This house, on a dead-end road, comes with five-and-a-half acres, most of them pasture, a size not atypical for the area. The town’s center, about six miles away, is characterized by 18th- and 19th-century houses, barns, Federals and Victorians. A weekly market across the road from the community library sells meat and produce from nearby farms. The Catamount Ski Area is within Hillsdale limits, while much of the land surrounding town, on both the New York and Massachusetts sides, consists of state park and forest.

INDOORS: The two-story house was built in 1991 and updated within the last five years. It has a clapboard exterior and a green metal roof. Common areas are anchored by a great room with 25-foot ceilings and a wall of south-facing French doors with views of the Berkshires. Overhead, dormer windows function like skylights, and French doors open to a porch running the length of the house; this overlooks a swimming pool. Floors are red oak throughout, while the pitched ceilings are pickled wood.

The great room is open to a den with a slate-surround fireplace. The kitchen has Poliform cabinets and appliances made by Sub-Zero and Miele. An island with a blond granite top separates the space from the great room. There are two bedrooms on the first floor, including the master. The master has French doors that open to the south porch. Its en-suite bathroom is paneled in dark green marble and has large six-over-six windows and a jetted tub under a pitched ceiling.

The remaining two bedrooms are upstairs, connected by a gallery-like hallway overlooking the great room, with a wall of shelving to display sculpture. There is an art studio above a detached garage.

The porch connects to a screened gazebo and the in-ground pool. About an acre and a half of the property is wooded, while the rest is taken up by a meditation garden and koi pond, a vegetable garden and a yard.

TAXES: $12,583 annually

CONTACT: Andrea Gabel, Gabel Real Estate, (518) 392-4975; gabelrealestate.com

•

CHICAGO

WHAT: A one-bedroom, two-bathroom penthouse

HOW MUCH: $1,099,000

SIZE: 2,537 square feet

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $433

SETTING: This condo is at the top of a 70-story building on a small peninsula that reaches into Lake Michigan. The building was constructed in 1967. The neighborhood, Streeterville, is part of downtown Chicago, a cluster of high-rises, luxury retailers, hotels and city landmarks. The Magnificent Mile, Chicago’s most famous shopping strip, is within about a mile, as is the million-square-foot museum at the Art Institute of Chicago, the theater district and Millennium Park. The condo is near Navy Pier, a mixed-use development home to a Ferris wheel, miniature golf and a Shakespeare theater.

INDOORS: The apartment, updated within the past three years, consists of two basic rooms: a great room of more than 1,500 square feet and a master bedroom. The great room incorporates a second bedroom that could be restored. The entire space has panoramic views of Lake Michigan and the city skyline.

Nearly every surface is white — white tile and white carpet, white Corian countertops, white leather window seats and white lacquered ceilings, all to make the space feel more open. Other surfaces are either mirrored or glass, and many are curved, following the lines of the building.

A retractable projection screen on one of the bedroom’s walls turns the room into a theater. The en-suite bathroom is only partially enclosed, giving a jetted tub wall-to-wall and floor-to-ceiling city views, while the shower, a massive curving chamber, is enclosed with Deco-inspired glass brick. Building amenities include an indoor pool, a gym and a racquetball court.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The building has a private two-and-a-half-acre park, wooded, with a playground and a duck pond. There’s also an outdoor pool.

TAXES: $16,374 a year plus $1,641 a month in condo fees

CONTACT: Tim Salm, Jameson Sotheby’s International Realty, (312) 545-6753; timsalm.com

•

CARBONDALE, COLO.

WHAT: A house with four bedrooms and three bathrooms, and a one-bedroom guesthouse

HOW MUCH: $1,095,000

SIZE: 3,632 square feet (total)

PRICE PER SQUARE FOOT: $301

SETTING: Carbondale is a town 30 miles from Aspen, in the central Rocky Mountains. This house is perched on a hill with unbroken views of Mount Sopris, in a section of town called Missouri Heights, known for its mountain ranches and horse properties. The region has many places to ski, hike, climb and fish, particularly near the confluence of the Fryingpan and Roaring Fork Rivers, in nearby Basalt.

INDOORS: The two-story contemporary was built in 1967 and extensively renovated within the last year. Its common areas are accented with timber posts and spherical lights. Intersecting walls of floor-to-ceiling windows in the great room face the mountain, while sliding glass doors in both the great room and the kitchen open to a deck that wraps around two sides of the house. Floors are a mix of wood and stone tile, and the stainless-steel kitchen appliances were installed during renovations.

One of the bedrooms is off a main-level hallway, as is a family room. The three additional bedrooms are upstairs, including the master, which has Mount Sopris views. The master bedroom opens to a sunroom, which opens in turn to a deck shared with one of the other bedrooms.

The one-and-a-half-bath guesthouse has a bedroom on the entry level and an upstairs living room and kitchen.

OUTDOOR SPACE: The house is on four acres, mostly pasture, with fenced areas for horses.

TAXES: $3,384 in 2013

CONTACT: Jana Dillard and Ted Borchelt, Aspen Snowmass Sotheby’s International Realty, (970) 948-9731 / (970) 309-3626; aspensnowmasssir.com