Sooner or later, a foreigner studying Mandarin Chinese in China is bound to hear from Chinese friends and teachers: “You know whose Chinese is really good? Dashan’s!”

Dashan, 大山, literally Big Mountain, is the stage persona of Mark Rowswell, a tall, sandy-haired Canadian who is China’s most famous homegrown foreign entertainer. Mr. Rowswell, 49, began studying Chinese at the University of Toronto and moved to Beijing after graduation to further master the language. In December 1988, four months after landing in the Chinese capital, he appeared in a comedy skit on the main state television network, China Central Television, or CCTV. That was when Dashan was born.

Mr. Rowswell then studied a traditional Chinese form of comedy called cross talk. His fame grew as he regularly performed that, along with other kinds of entertainment, on television. Starting in 1998, he appeared four times on the annual CCTV Spring Festival Gala, the most watched television event of the year in China. No other foreigner has made as many appearances in the gala, though Mr. Rowswell says it is a “common misconception” that that is what made Dashan a household name. Most of his big shows have been on CCTV during other holidays, he says.

This year’s gala will be broadcast on Wednesday, the eve of the Year of the Sheep. But Mr. Rowswell, who since 1995 has split his time between homes in Beijing and Canada, where his family lives, will not be performing. He has focused more recently on doing Western-style stand-up comedy in venues across China. In an interview, he discussed his decision to reinvent himself, the straitjacket of tradition and making Chinese laugh. Excerpts follow:

Q: What inspired this new direction in your career?

A: “Inspired” is a strange way to put it, as depression was much more of a catalyst. “What depressed you enough to get into stand-up comedy?” is probably a more appropriate question.

I did my first proper stand-up gig in December 2013, almost exactly 25 years to the day from my first appearance as Dashan in 1988. I didn’t tell anyone, but that was my own way of marking the anniversary. I’ve felt for some time that I’d had a good run as Dashan, am proud of the success I had, but had clearly come to the end of whatever road I was following. I wasn’t enjoying my work anymore and I didn’t think that media and the entertainment business in general in China were moving in the right direction. So it seemed like a good point to do something new and very different.

Entertainment is always a young person’s business. That’s the same the world over, but there’s also an arrogance of youth that just assumes things are different/better/more open/more innovative/more advanced than before. Now that I’ve become the “senior performer,” I look back and think: “O.K., that stuff we did years ago was pretty schlocky, but all that’s really changed nowadays are the production values.” If you look specifically at what Westerners are doing on Chinese media, it seems that everyone is stuck in a time warp. What’s the difference with what we were doing in the 1980s and 1990s? Not much at all. Everybody is stuck repeating the same patterns. Maybe it’s up to the “seniors” to lead innovation. I’ve paid my dues, I’ve been a good student, I’ve learned the ropes and now I’m in a position where I can focus more energy on doing what I want to do and what I personally find rewarding and meaningful.

Most people seem to think it’s crazy. Well, we’ll see what becomes of it. It is a process that’s going to take some time, a learning process for me and something that goes against common sense to a certain extent. It’s certainly not what the mass market demands. But at least it’s very new, and that’s exciting. I think it’s exactly what I needed after reaching the 25-year mark.

Q: What are the biggest differences between performing cross talk and Western-style stand-up comedy in China?

A: Cross talk has become increasingly focused on tradition. You have to have a formal mentor who teaches you the conventions and the canon of classical pieces. There’s a lot of emphasis on style and even ritual, and people spend a lot of energy discussing whether a comedic performance technically qualifies as “cross talk.” They’ll say, “That’s funny, but it’s not really cross talk,” to which the flip side is, “That’s proper cross talk, but it’s not really funny.” Young people, especially, focus on learning and upholding the tradition, and I personally think that’s unfortunate. Tradition is important, but the most important thing is to understand tradition and why it became tradition, not simply to mimic it. There are universal truths of comedy, the rhythms and patterns of comedy, that are behind all of those traditions. Performers and audiences have become overly concerned with the style of cross talk out of, I think, a misguided emphasis on tradition.

The great thing about stand-up is that tradition isn’t front and center. You just have to be funny. Audiences don’t know the tradition anyway. They call stand-up “tuokouxiu” 脱口秀, which is the same word they use for everything from Oprah Winfrey to Louis C.K. to Jon Stewart’s “The Daily Show.” These days the term “tuokouxiu” is everywhere, but the definition is very vague. It’s just Western-style talking and being funny. That’s great for me because it allows me to create my own style. And people think I must know what I’m doing, because I am a Westerner, after all.

Q: What are the biggest differences between a Western performer doing stand-up in China and, say, in Canada or the United States?

A: The market, or lack thereof. Going to comedy clubs in Canada, the U.S. or Europe, the thing that always blows me away is how well developed the marketplace is. Ordinary people go out on a regular basis and pay money to watch live comedy. There is an established circuit that performers follow around the country and, internationally, you can make a living just going from club to club, festival to festival, and there are very clear paths from smaller clubs to the bigger ones, to festivals to TV and beyond.

That just doesn’t exist in China. There are a few very small clubs that are always struggling to find paying customers, and it’s largely removed from the mainstream entertainment business. At this point nobody in China is really making money off of stand-up comedy. People who persist in working away at stand-up are all doing it from a sense of passion and a belief that we can build something.

Q: Are there certain models you look to when developing your stand-up routine?

A: The influences are from two entirely different camps. First are the guys I grew up listening to, memorizing bits from the stand-up comedy of Bill Cosby, Steve Martin, Eddie Murphy. Second are the cross-talk masters I learned from in my 20s and beyond: Hou Baolin, Ma Ji, Jiang Kun. I’m relatively unbiased when it comes to taste, so I’ll listen equally to more recent guys like Guo Degang and Zhou Libo, for example. Most fans of one hate the other, but I respect each for their success. What I’m trying to build with the Dashan show is a very personal style, whatever the Dashan style is, and I’ll build in anything as long as it suits me personally. That’s something that’s very different from the norm in China, where you’re expected to learn the rules and customs and follow a particular style. I often have to explain: There are no rules, just what works for you.

Q: What are the most interesting shows you’ve done? What kinds of jokes seem to work well with the audiences here?

A: In live comedy, it’s the venue that determines the audience as well as what and how you perform. The overall distinction between Chinese and Western audiences is too broad and vague to be of much practical use. Chinese audiences where? In a bar, a theater, a university, a community center, at a diplomatic event? Those are all hugely different from each other. I’ve covered a lot of different ground over the past year. I did one university performance in front of 6,000 first-year students who were in the middle of their mandatory military training. Within the space of 10 days I went from performing at the Canadian Embassy to an underground heavy metal club. Each time you think, “Is this going to work?” Well, so far so good. You adapt your material and your style to the venue.

Q: How has your fame as Dashan affected the way people react to your stand-up routines?

A: My performances are entirely based on the fact that I’m a recognized commodity. People come to the shows to see Dashan, but also to see something a bit different. To be honest, I’m not really interested in performing to audiences that don’t know Dashan. There are more than enough people who do know me and what I’ve done over the years, and that’s great fodder for me to work with. Having audiences that know the back story makes it easier for me to play with expectations and hopefully break out a bit from the East-West cultural dialogue that never seems to change very much. So being Dashan is a huge benefit that I try to exploit as much as possible.

Q: Do you have any favorite jokes that you want to share with our readers?

A: No. I don’t really tell jokes, actually. I think that’s a misunderstanding about comedy. At least my humor tends to be much more situational and story-based, it’s about being a Westerner in China, or being this Westerner who’s seen as being “more Chinese than the Chinese,” being between cultures, or being the “national TV celebrity” that you are now seeing live and close up as a flesh-and-blood person, and all of the twists and turns that can be worked off of those kinds of themes.

Q: In what venues do you mostly perform these days, and to what kinds of audiences?

A: Going through my records, I ended up doing 28 gigs in universities last year. That was the main forum where I practiced for my solo show, starting off with something like a humorous lecture about my background and cross-cultural issues in general, and gradually working that into a solid 60-70 minutes of comedic material. It started out more like 20 percent comedic content and I just kept working on the funny side.

There are stand-up clubs in Beijing, Shanghai and Shenzhen, as you know, but it’s a very limited environment. It’s not at all like the U.S., where you can work out stuff in the smaller clubs and then go into bigger theaters. So I did the stand-up venues like Hot Cat Club in Beijing a few times, but I found that very limiting. You’re working with maybe 40 to 60 people in the audience — on a good night. Sometimes more like 15 to 20 people. And they tend to be a very narrow niche audience of fairly devoted stand-up fans, not a cross section of society at all. So I probably did eight or 10 appearances in small clubs like that.

I found it better to appear as a “special guest” when some of these stand-up clubs did proper commercial performances in theaters, where you’re dealing more with 150 to 200 or sometimes as many as 400 people in the audience. At a rough count, I did about 14 of those kinds of theater performances with various stand-up troupes. So the university and club gigs together puts me at roughly 50 stand-up appearances of one type or the other over 2014.

Q: How do young Chinese react to your routine?

A: The university gigs are the best, because on a week’s notice the student unions can organize an audience of between 300 and 1,500 students. At one point I performed before 6,000 first-year students at the Central China Agricultural University in Wuhan. The audiences are great, and although they represent a narrow range in terms of age and educational background, the audiences do come from all over China and different walks of life. I performed all the way from Zhuhai to Harbin, from Shanghai to Xi’an, and did a couple for Chinese university students in Canada — University of Toronto, Waterloo and so on. My next university gig is going to be at Cambridge in the U.K. in March. Just counting the university gigs in China, those 28 universities were spread across 15 cities.

In terms of content, I found universities to be almost completely open. I never had my presentation vetted in advance, and my 60-minute talk was always followed by an open question-and-answer session. Even questions about June 4 or Occupy Central did come up a few times, and I tried to answer those in a way that was honest but also understanding of the limits of what would be considered “appropriate.” I’ve always taken a middle ground, because it’s the only way to ensure that your voice is heard at all. I can go into these university settings and speak freely because I have built up the reputation of “Dashan” over the years that people feel they can trust. Since November we have heard that universities are cracking down on “Western influences,” but I haven’t experienced that myself directly, at least yet. We’ll see what that’s like when I get back on the road in April.