Elma Moy, a teacher from southern China, opened her learning center in a storefront with low ceilings on Henry Street in 1982, catering to Chinatown’s growing student body. For years, her Web site was mostly in Cantonese, advertisements were reserved for Chinese-language daily newspapers, and staff members at the front desk greeted parents signing up for classes with “Ching choh la.” (“Have a seat.”)

Today, Ms. Moy, 68, spends a lot of her time in her second location, in TriBeCa, with well-lighted hallways, quaint French doors and an oversize poster with the school’s English name — Florentine — prominently displayed by the elevator. The centers now feature a mostly English Web site, glossy English-language pamphlets, and ads in citywide parenting magazines.

Ms. Moy’s 30-year-old daughter, Olympia Moy, a Princeton graduate who has encouraged her mother to expand, said they still catered to the children of Chinatown vegetable sellers who pay in $10 bills. But in recent years, they have also worked hard to draw in the Caucasian lawyers, bankers and artists who populate Lower Manhattan. The center’s clientele is now 70 percent Chinese, down from 97 percent when it opened in 2011, Olympia Moy said.

“We are looking for kids from all different backgrounds,” she said.

It’s no surprise to the average New York parent that so-called cram schools, once the cultural domain of Chinese-, Korean- and Russian-American students, have gained traction with non-Asian parents hoping to grab slots in competitive gifted programs and coveted middle and high schools by improving their children’s test scores.

But whereas five years ago owners of cram schools were surprised to encounter non-Asian students in their waiting rooms, now they are muscling one another for their business, handing out book bags with the names of their schools scrawled across the front, attending summer camp fairs in synagogues and school cafeterias, hiring receptionists who speak English, and aggressively pitting themselves against the Japanese cram school behemoth, Kumon, which dominates the local market.

Some are even changing their names. Horizon, a well-reputed cram school in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, known among Chinese-American families for funneling students into Stuyvesant High School and NEST+m, was recently rechristened Gifted Kids New York City. “It’s a little more appealing to Caucasian parents,” said the owner, Andrew Chan, who tells prospective parents from Park Slope and Williamsburg, Brooklyn, that he is offering “Chinese rigor” with Western-style teaching methods.

E.nopi, a 37-year-old tutoring franchise developed by a South Korean entrepreneur, recently switched its American name to Eye-Level, to call up an image popular among American parents: child-centric instruction. In its recently opened Park Slope center, where four one-hour sessions cost $200, about two-thirds of the 100 or so students are black, Hispanic or white, according to the school. “We’re a complete mixed crowd now,” said Franco Verdino, the owner of the Park Slope franchise.

Even Russian-American schools — originally designed to help parents from the mother country impart on their children knowledge of the Slavic language and its literature — are seeking a wider audience. SchoolPlus, which opened in North Brunswick, N.J., in 1995 to serve area Russians, now has 15 locations, including one on the Upper West Side and one in Princeton, N.J. Some offer classes that include advanced science and SAT preparation.

The test-preparation industry is expected to generate $840.4 million in revenues in 2013, according to a recently released report by the market research firm IBISWorld. That figure is expected to climb to $876.9 million by 2018. Spurring the trend, experts say, are the very obsessions that drive New York parents to distraction: the increasing competitiveness of the college entrance process, the introduction of more rigorous national curriculum standards, and a lack of faith in local public schools.

Margaret M. Chin, an associate professor of sociology at Hunter College who studies Asian-American immigrants, said local demographics were also playing a role in the diversification efforts, particularly among Manhattan and Brooklyn Chinese-American cram centers. Between 2000 and 2010, U.S. census figures indicate, the white population in Manhattan’s Chinatown grew by 42 percent, while neighborhoods north of Sunset Park, commonly referred to as Brooklyn’s Chinatown, were also more white.

“To grow, they have to open their markets,” Dr. Chin said.

At Florentine, where an 18-week package of Saturday elementary or middle school classes goes for $1,255, the attempts to diversify were evident on a recent Saturday morning.

In one room, a group of mostly Asian teenagers in hoodies and Ugg boots pored over thick test-prep books as they jotted down their answers to practice SAT math questions. Meanwhile, in a carpeted room in the front, flanked by large windows, Natalie Schonfeld and Camila Grunberg, two 9-year-olds who are white, nibbled on green-tea cupcakes during a break in their two-hour writing class. Water bottles, pencil cases and highlighters were strewn across their desks. Not one of the five students in their noon class was Chinese.

Camila considers the morning class like camp. “I love it,” she said.

But Atticus Khalif, a third grader at nearby Public School 130, was less enthused. He took his shoes off, fiddled with his pencil and occasionally made funny noises. When asked how long he had been coming, he barked, “This is my terrible 10th time.”