A RENOVATED VICTORIAN SCHOOLHOUSE

1.75 MILLION POUNDS ($2.75 MILLION)

Just southeast of Cambridge in the village of Grantchester, this former school dating to the 1860s was updated and expanded starting in the 1980s. The five-bedroom four-and-a-half bath home now has about 2,800 square feet of living space spread over two interconnected structures. Original details like tiled roofs, vaulted ceilings and arched doorways have been preserved.

Entrance is through a central hall to the right of the main school building, which resembles a chapel, with exterior buttresses, a peaked roof and soaring windows. A drawing room of about 600 square feet takes up most of the first floor of the school, and has a fireplace and a wood-plank floor. A mezzanine arrangement allows light to flow in through double-height windows.

A study and one en-suite bedroom are next to the drawing room. The dining room and kitchen are in an attached original outbuilding to the rear. The kitchen has a central island for dining or food preparation, two ovens and integrated appliances; French doors in the dining room and kitchen open to the garden.

The master suite is above the kitchen, and has a whirlpool as well as a shower in the bathroom. Three other bedrooms, one with an en-suite bath, and two bathrooms are in the second level of the schoolhouse. The quarter-acre property is fully landscaped, with a lawn, extensive plantings and trellises, and a flagstone terrace. A two-car garage is attached to the right of the entrance.

The historic village of Grantchester is on the River Cam, about two miles southeast of Cambridge, and was the home for a short time of the poet Rupert Brooke, who died during World War I. A popular walk follows the river through Grantchester Meadows to the center of Cambridge. The main rail station, with trains to Kings Cross station in London in less than an hour, is about 10 minutes’ drive, and Stansted airport is about a 30-minute drive.

MARKET OVERVIEW

With the possible exception of central London, Cambridge has had the hottest housing market in Britain in recent years, agents say, whether measured by price increase or time for properties to sell. A survey in October by Hometrack found that prices had risen  12.2 percent over the past year, 52.3 percent since the trough in the 2008 recession, and 25.6 percent over the pre-recession peak. The best properties are being snatched up almost immediately, agents said, with a recent news report citing a figure of 27 days to sell a home.

“We think in the last two years we’ve seen a rise of between 30 and 40 percent” in prices, said James Milner, senior valuer at Tucker Gardner real estate. “It’s all about supply and demand, and we just do not have the supply.”

Bidding wars have been the norm. “It was incredibly aggressive,” Mr. Milner said. Agents said the market is based on sound fundamentals, rather than speculation, with demand driven by Cambridge University itself; vibrant biotech and high-tech industries, many spawned by the university and its colleges; and proximity to London. Cambridge Science Park on the northeastern edge of the city is home to dozens of companies and was first developed in the 1970s in collaboration with Trinity College, which has owned the land since the 16th century. Another hub is the biomedical campus around Addenbrooke’s Hospital to the south, where AstraZeneca is planning a new global research and development center, expected to employ several thousand people.

Beyond the employment picture, Cambridge’s quality of life is a prime attraction. “Clearly, Cambridge is known for its university and its colleges,” Mr. Carey said. “The core of the city is pretty much untouched — the historic buildings, King’s College Chapel, the River Cam meandering through.”

The state-run schools are some of the country’s best, agents said. “The schools here are incredible,” said Ed Meyer, the head of residential properties for Savills  in Cambridge. “If you want your children to go to Oxbridge, they have good chances” in Cambridge.

Buyers can expect to pay at least $600,000 for a new or recently built two-bedroom two-bath apartment in the city, agents said. Attached Victorian terrace houses — “the heartbeat of the city,” said Cameron Ewer, the head of residential agency at Strutt and Parker in Cambridge — with three bedrooms start at about $950,000. Historic stand-alone houses, rare but desirable, are $2 million and up.

However, Mr. Ewer said, “As soon as you move out of the city, the prices soften a bit. You can pick up a four-bedroom house for 600,000 to 1 million pounds,” or about $940,000 to $1.6 million.

While much of the rest of the world has struggled to recover from the 2008 recession, it was barely a blip in Cambridge, agents said. After a boom from 1999 to 2008, Mr. Milner said, “We lost about 20 percent in price in about a year. It knocked the stuffing out of the market. But within 18 months the market had pretty much recovered.”

As for predicting the market in the coming year, he said: “We think it’s going to plateau. We won’t see falling prices; I don’t think it’s overcooked itself.”

WHO BUYS IN CAMBRIDGE

About 75 percent of buyers are British, agents said. A large percentage of that category are people connected with the university, either as employees, parents of students or alumni. “There’s an umbilical cord that sort of pulls them back,” Mr. Meyer of Savills said.

In recent years, as prices in London have soared, an increasing number of buyers from there have made the decision to live in the Cambridge area and commute to London, agents said. To reach central London, said Chris Carey of Bidwells, which is listing the property in Grantchester, “it’s almost as quick a commute from Cambridge as it is from certain areas of London.”

The foreign buyers who make up the remaining 25 percent tend to work at the university or in the area’s growing high-tech industry. Many come from Asia, especially China, Taiwan and the Indian subcontinent, agents said, with relatively few from Europe or North America.

And while foreign buyers increasingly see London real estate as an investment, Mr. Carey said, “They see Cambridge as a workplace rather than a place to park money.”

BUYING BASICS

There are no restrictions on foreign buyers. A graduated stamp duty land tax starts at 1 percent for properties sold for 125,001 pounds and is capped at 7 percent for properties over 2 million pounds.

Mr. Ewer, of Strutt and Parker, said it was “absolutely crucial” that buyers retain a lawyer for transactions in Cambridge, because many properties are sold with covenants linked to the university. Fees per transaction range from 500 pounds to 2,500 pounds, he said.

TAXES AND FEES

Property taxes are about $4,120 (2,625 pounds) a year.

WEBSITES

Cambridgeshire County Council: cambridgeshire.gov.uk

Cambridge City Council: cambridge.gov.uk

Cambridge University: cam.ac.uk

Cambridge tourism: visitcambridge.org

LANGUAGES AND CURRENCY

English; pound (1 pound = $1.57)

CONTACT

Chris Carey, Bidwells, bidwells.co.uk, (44 1223) 841842