A friend recently told me, breathless with excitement, that she was renewing her lease at 8 Spruce Street, the Frank Gehry-designed 76-story skyscraper, without any rent increase.

In this red-hot rental market, why would the landlord, Forest City Ratner Companies, renew its leases without demanding more in rent?

Most of us who rent, and that is the bulk of New Yorkers, expect to be mildly abused by their landlords. Every year as our leases near the end of their terms, we wait anxiously to find out what next year’s outlay will look like.

And when we gaze at behemoth rental towers that offer perks like full-time doormen, health clubs and live-in supers, those annual rent increases seem as inevitable as a roof-deck misting station. But that may just not be true.

Lynda Lippin, 47, lives in an alcove studio at 8 Spruce, officially known as New York by Gehry at 8 Spruce Street, with her husband and dog, a onetime stray. After two years, she still carries around the silver Tiffany key ring she was given when she moved in, a square in the shape of the tower. She speaks fondly of the private residents-only viewing party held not long ago for a $35,000-a-month penthouse, where cheese and wine were circulated amid the unobstructed 360-degree views. She attends the buildingwide barbecues, where gourmet ice-cream sandwiches are handed out. And even though she doesn’t regularly go to the building’s gym, “it is lovely to stare at the snow falling on the glass ceiling” while swimming in its heated pool.

Last month the managing agent e-mailed her to say that if she committed to her two-year lease by mid-July, rather than wait until it expired at the end of October, she could renew at her current rent, around $3,300 a month. Her annual $300 per-person amenities fee would also be waived.

“I couldn’t believe it,” said Ms. Lippin, a master instructor at Real Pilates, a studio in TriBeCa. “I was stunned, actually.” She signed the lease immediately.

This is a far cry from the rent increases and stiff competition that most New York renters are experiencing. “It’s a tough market,” said Marc Lewis, the chairman and a senior adviser for Coldwell Banker A.C. Lawrence, whose listings generally skew toward the lower end of the price spectrum. “At most buildings, rents go up every year, and the increases have been more this year than last year and the year before that.

“Landlords rarely give tenants a hometown discount anymore,” he added, referring to concessions offered to current tenants. “Now, if you were paying $2,000 last year, this year they are asking $2,700.”

There are many reasons why Forest City Ratner might forgo rent increases. The luxury market, which has been commanding steadily higher prices for more than a year, may finally have plateaued. This may be especially true downtown, where luxury rents have fallen over the past year. There are also the costs associated with having to find new tenants, as well as competition from new developments in the neighborhood.

Rental renewal rates are proprietary to landlords and nearly impossible to track. Declining to discuss specifics, Melissa Roman Burch, the director of commercial and residential development for Forest City Ratner, said in a statement, “Since the building opened we have received great feedback from tenants, who are drawn to Frank Gehry’s iconic design as well as the building’s world-class amenities, and our renewals reflect this enthusiasm.”

Cliff Finn, an executive vice president of Douglas Elliman Development Marketing, who, while at Citi Habitats, oversaw the original leasing at 8 Spruce Street, said there were “lots of reasons for landlords offering promotions like this.” With 899 apartments, the building was so large that incentives like free rent were necessary when it opened, to fill it up as quickly as possible, said Mr. Finn, who continues to represent the building. “So now, when these tenants come up for renewal, having a zero percent increase helps them mentally adjust to the full market rent.”

In other words, while the landlord may seem to be giving something away, Forest City Ratner maintains that it is actually receiving more rent from Ms. Lippin and her husband. Since they were given two months rent-free when they first signed their lease, their net effective rent has been about 8 percent lower than the face value of the unit.

But from Ms. Lippin’s perspective, the lack of free rent in the new lease makes little difference. “Except for those first two months two years ago,” she said, “we’ve been paying full rent, so the money out of our pocket stays the same as it has always been.”

The overall rental market may also be a factor in Forest City Ratner’s decision. After quarter upon quarter of steep price increases, it looks as though it may finally be flattening out. “In Manhattan over the last 18 months, there has been an unprecedented rise in rents,” said Jonathan J. Miller, the president of the appraisal firm Miller Samuel. “But in the last five months, it has been sliding, with rents rising at a slower pace.”

According to a recent rental report for Douglas Elliman that Mr. Miller wrote, the median rents downtown increased a nominal 1.5 percent, to $3,350, in July compared with July 2012. And in the market for three-bedroom apartments, which are typically luxury units, the median rent downtown actually fell 8.7 percent, to $5,250, during the same period.

The Gehry building in particular seems to have seen some softening of prices. When it was under construction, it marketed its penthouses for as much as $60,000 a month, a staggering price for the area. It eventually lowered the price tag to $45,000 and is now renting them for $35,000.

“Sometimes it behooves a landlord to keep a tenant in place even if there is a minor dip below the market-rate rent,” said Gary L. Malin, the president of Citi Habitats. “The reality is, if there are a significant amount of people whose leases are overturning at the same time, or if you consider the cost of preparing an apartment for a new tenant, like painting, concessions and paying the brokerage fee, it may make sense.”

Eight Spruce Street is also about to have some competition. Next summer, a few blocks to the south, the former headquarters of the financial giant A.I.G. will open as a huge luxury rental development. The developer Rose Associates is converting the building, known as 70 Pine, into 780 units that will have a hotel component and amenities that include two bowling alleys and an observatory and cigar bar with unimpeded views of downtown.

Given these factors, Forest City Ratner’s decision to offer no rent increases “makes sense,” Mr. Miller said. “The landlord is anticipating that the rents are already high, let’s keep the building at the current rents and keep it full.”

But while downtown and 8 Spruce Street may be finding their footing, the overall luxury market is faring somewhat better. The top 10 percent of rental units across Manhattan saw a median price increase of 11.7 percent, to $8,412, in July compared with July 2012, according to data from Mr. Miller. And comparable buildings, like MiMA, a 500-unit rental at 450 West 42nd Street that opened last year, are not offering a break on renewals.

“We just went through our first wave of renewals and we didn’t offer any concessions,” said Daria Salusbury, a senior vice president who heads the luxury rental division for Related, “and 90 to 95 percent came with a modest rent increase. The rental market isn’t the strongest I have seen, but I’ve seen worse.”

So the market slide that 8 Spruce Street may be experiencing might be a function of its location. The neighborhood was hit hard by Hurricane Sandy, causing some tenants to leave. The building had backup generators, but there was still cold water and intermittent power for 9 days; the landlord offered tenants a prorated rent reduction to compensate for the inconvenience.

At the time 8 Spruce came on the market in 2011, it was said to be breaking a price ceiling in the financial district. Maybe the landlord, having broken into these higher price ranges, has decided that at least for the time being, it can go no higher. And that suits Ms. Lippin just fine.





