MOUNT MAKIVKA, Ukraine — In a conflict that cost millions of lives, destroyed four empires and introduced Europe to the horrors of chemical weapons and total war, the battle on a pine-covered mountain in what is today western Ukraine was a modest affair. A few hundred soldiers died, and the outcome was so muddled that all sides claimed victory.

For Ukrainians, however, the battle nearly a century ago was a singular event not only in World War I, but also in a longer conflict with Russia that rumbles on today at the eastern end of their country.

For it was at Makivka, according to a Ukrainian version of events that is celebrated in museum displays, monuments, patriotic songs and a recent movie, that Ukrainian soldiers achieved an extraordinary feat: They held their ground against the Russian Empire.

“Makivka was a turning point,” said Andriy Tkachik, a forest ranger in the mountainous area southwest of the city of Lviv who has set up a small private museum to display rusty rifles, bayonets and other war detritus dug up from the battlefield. “It showed we could fight.”

It was also early evidence of the divided loyalties, or at least the conflicting demands on those loyalties, that a century later cast a long shadow over Ukraine’s efforts to create a functioning and united state.

Their historic lands claimed by both the Russian czar and the Hapsburgs, Ukrainians fought on both sides of World War I. Some, like the 800 or so members of a unit called the Sich Sharpshooters that held off the Russians at Makivka in April 1915, served as volunteers for the Austro-Hungarian Empire of the Hapsburg dynasty, which had governed the western part of Ukraine since the late 18th century. An additional 250,000 served the Austrians as conscripts.

About 3.5 million Ukrainians, a vast majority of them conscripts, fought for the Russians, who controlled the central and eastern parts of what is now Ukraine.

Of the three powers that did most of the fighting on the eastern front during the war — czarist Russia on one side, the Austro-Hungarian Empire and the German Empire of Kaiser Wilhelm II on the other — none survived the cataclysm. For Ukraine, however, World War I delivered not only catastrophic suffering but also its first modern experience as an independent state. It was an experiment that lasted only a few months and was scarred by anarchy and infighting, but it laid the foundations for Ukraine today.

“Without World War I,” said Oleh Pavlyshyn, a historian at the Ivan Franko National University of Lviv, “it would have been impossible to imagine that Ukraine would be a separate country.”

But the war, which Russia initially saw as a chance to unite within its empire all of its Slavic brethren in “Little Russia,” as it called Ukraine, also planted suspicions that poison Russia’s dealings with Ukraine to this day.

It left many Russians convinced that Ukrainian national sentiment and even the Ukrainian language, dismissed by czarist officials as a “Little Russian dialect,” were fictions invented by its enemies to undermine Russian rule. In Russia, the wartime exploits of Ukrainian troops at Makivka and other battles in the Carpathian Mountains are remembered, when they are mentioned at all, not as an example of Ukraine’s fighting spirit, but as evidence of the perils of division among Slavic peoples.

“Now is the right moment,” the czar’s foreign minister said in 1916 after a series of military setbacks, “to rid ourselves of the Ukrainian movement once and for all.”

Mr. Pavlyshyn, the Lviv historian, said the role of the Sich Sharpshooters was perhaps overblown as part of what he said had become “the cult of Makivka,” but he added that every country needed a “heroic cult that honors those who were willing to shed their own blood.”

While often killing only their own brethren on the battlefields of World War I, Mr. Pavlyshyn said, Ukrainians who served on opposite sides discovered for the first time “that they were the same people and started to think like Ukrainians.” A nationalist cause that had been mostly limited to intellectuals and politicians expanded to “create a real national consciousness.”

Instead of a single Ukrainian state, however, the war produced two: one in Kiev formed from what had been Russian-controlled territory in central and eastern Ukraine, and another based in Lviv on western Ukrainian lands that had been ruled until World War I by the Hapsburgs. Neither had much authority.

The Bolsheviks, who seized power in Russia in 1917, also created a third, nominally Ukrainian state in the eastern city of Kharkiv, but their principal purpose was to thwart the Ukranians’ efforts to take advantage of the chaos created by the war and run their own affairs.

When the war erupted nearly a century ago, Russian forces mobilized and swiftly captured the western city of Lviv and the surrounding region of eastern Galicia. Aleksei Brusilov, a Russian commanding officer, proclaimed the territory — under Hapsburg control for more than two centuries and ruled before that by Poland — as “Russian land from time immemorial, populated after all by Russian people.”

Instead of rallying behind Russia and its ruler, Czar Nicholas II, however, many Ukrainians in the west sided with the Hapsburg dynasty, which had granted them a political voice and freedoms unimaginable to Ukrainian speakers living under the Russian Empire to the east.

Eager to make use of this loyalty, Austrian authorities agreed to let Ukrainians set up their own unit within the Austrian Army, the Sich Sharpshooters. More than 25,000 Ukrainians volunteered, but the Austrians, worried about the force becoming too big to control, accepted only about 2,000 when the unit was set up in August 1914.

Despite the Sharpshooters’ eagerness to defend Hapsburg rule, Russia seized Lviv in September 1914 and began hunting down those accused of being traitors and spies, often Ukrainians who had embraced what one czarist official described as “extremely dangerous Little Russian separatism.” The region’s new Russian governor shut down Ukrainian-language schools that had been nurtured by the Austrians, arrested the head of the Ukrainian Catholic Church and started an aggressive campaign to destroy the idea that Ukrainian interests could ever legitimately diverge from those of Russia.

Austrian forces later recaptured Lviv, which they called Lemberg, in 1915. With help from Germany, they moved deep into what had been Russian-ruled Ukrainian territories, including Kiev, where they helped prop up the Ukrainian National Republic, a short-lived independent state, and a German puppet state that followed.

Ravaged by hunger, incompetence, a typhoid epidemic and bloody spillover from Russia’s civil war between Lenin’s Bolsheviks and czarist loyalists known as White Russians, the Ukrainian government proposed an alliance with the loyalists. But their commander, Gen. Anton Denikin, was a firm believer that Ukraine belonged to Russia and rejected working with an independent Ukrainian state that he abhorred — a decision President Vladimir V. Putin has referred to approvingly on several occasions in recent months.

The victorious Western allies in World War I put a final nail in the coffin of an independent Ukrainian state by agreeing in 1919 that Poland, not Ukraine, should take over former Hapsburg territory around Lviv. Russia kept the east. The two Ukranian states previously declared on these lands vanished. Scattered bands of Ukrainian nationalists, sustained by tales of the battle of Makivka, continued to fight on, first against Polish and then Soviet authorities, well into the 1950s.

“Everyone talked about Makivka when I was growing up,” said Yuriy Shukhevych, an 81-year-old veteran nationalist who spent more than three decades in Soviet prisons and whose father, Roman, led the Ukrainian Insurgent Army against Polish and then Soviet rule.

The Sich Sharpshooters, Mr. Shukhevych added, “set an example as the first Ukrainians who took up arms, entered battle and did not betray their military honor.” By fighting in the Austrian Army, he added, the unit “fought for Russia’s enemy, but it was not our enemy. Our enemy was Russia.”