‘‘THIS IS THE TICKET, folks,’’ says Eli Sussman. ‘‘This is the jam right here.’’ A coney has been placed in front of him on a table at American Coney Island, a red-and-white rockabillyish restaurant in downtown Detroit that could have easily doubled as the set of a White Stripes music video. In Michigan parlance, ‘‘coney island’’ essentially signifies a Greek diner, and a coney is a hot dog. And in this city, it’s only served one way: smothered in chili, yellow mustard and a fistful of raw white onions — no substitutions. ‘‘When you look at it, you say, ‘Oh, man, this is a terrible idea,’ ’’ says Eli’s older brother, Max. ‘‘Then you eat it and you’re like, ‘I kind of want another one.’ ’’

‘‘This is the ultimate drunk food,’’ Eli says.

‘‘Eli says that about a lot of stuff. He’ll probably say it four more times.’’

‘‘All four times I will be right.’’

Max and Eli have worked as chefs at some of the coolest and most influential restaurants in New York City, although they’ve since branched out on their own, dreaming up their own version of a karaoke bar, writing popular cookbooks in which they insist that anyone with a kitchen can prepare bouillabaisse or oxtail tamales, and appearing in an online video series in which they gobble their way through cities like Nashville and Las Vegas. The Sussmans, both in their 30s, grew up in Huntington Woods, a quiet suburb 15 miles north of the crumbling core of Detroit. They went to college close to home — Max to the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Eli to Michigan State in East Lansing — but eventually struck out for the coasts. Max wound up cooking with April Bloomfield at the Breslin Bar & Dining Room in Manhattan, and then with Carlo Mirarchi at Roberta’s in Brooklyn. Eli worked in advertising in Los Angeles, feeling all the while a little trapped, until his brother convinced him to come to New York. With almost no formal training, Eli landed a job at Mile End, Noah Bernamoff’s homage to Montreal-style smoked meat.

Growing up in Michigan has clearly influenced how the Sussman brothers like to eat and cook: Their approach to food is as unpretentious, family-style and free of borders as the city that made them. They have come back to Detroit to revisit some of the places responsible for their love of food, and their wistful Michigan voyage de retour quickly turns into an exercise in Rabelaisian excess, with smoked fish and Thai curry and deli sandwiches and deep-dish pizza and takeout sushi and blueberry cake blurring into one extended pan-cultural banquet.

Recently, they teamed up for their first restaurant together in New York, Samesa, located in a Brooklyn beer hall called Berg’n. Samesa specializes in shawarma, a dish they grew up on — and one that’s almost as omnipresent as coneys in Detroit, thanks to a large population of immigrants from Lebanon, Syria and Iraq.

For the Sussmans, the local gold standard can be found at one of the stops on their itinerary, Pita Café in the town of Oak Park. The shawarma here is moist and compact — quite unlike the typical messy avalanche of meat and tahini. With future Samesa locations on their mind, the brothers have become fairly obsessed with this stuff. ‘‘We were talking about — God, it sounds so lame to say this, but, like, sauce distribution,’’ Eli says. He gives the Pita Café prototype an admiring look: ‘‘This is totally, exactly, what I always want to eat.’’

Max cracks a big smile: ‘‘It’s pretty much the perfect drunk food.’’

SINCE THEY WERE KIDS, the Sussman brothers have been going to the Detroit Institute of Arts to gaze at the massive Diego Rivera murals that glorify the city as a workers’ paradise. Standing before them now, they seem no less awestruck. ‘‘It’s a very profound thing to have in the middle of a postindustrial collapse,’’ Max says. ‘‘What this place could have been, as opposed to what it has become.’’ They study it for a few moments more. Then Max says: ‘‘Let’s go light some cheese on fire.’’ For almost as long as they have visited the murals, they have followed it up with a trip downtown to Pegasus Taverna for some saganaki, a dish of Greek cheese that gets flambéed and then extinguished with a spritz of lemon juice.

Max and Eli were living in New York when Detroit declared bankruptcy in 2013. Conventional folklore has it that the city stands, or wobbles, as a parable of regression and rust, and all you have to do is drive around to see that there’s plenty of truth to that narrative. But if you take the time to talk to people, you find remnants of the go-go energy that propelled the city to prosperity a century ago — and which could help shape what Detroit will feel like in the future.

It would be naïve to proclaim that a grass-roots food crusade is going to save Detroit, but a lot of chefs, urban farmers and activists seem determined to try. There’s a new wave of restaurants leading the charge, energizing neighborhoods and reintroducing the Midwestern larder to the best local ingredients. At the front of the pack is Rose’s Fine Food, where Molly Mitchell (a veteran of Tartine Bakery in San Francisco) and her cousin Lucy Carnaghi have converted a fading coney island into an affordable, artisanal outpost for brisket hash, rabbit sandwiches and blueberry pancakes served with a crisp slab of fried trout.

Another is Supino Pizzeria, situated in the Eastern Market neighborhood, steps away from a halal slaughterhouse, where the Sussmans’ friend Dave Mancini pays a monthly rent so low (for both his pizza parlor and for La Rondinella, a new Italian spot he’s opening next door) that it would make a Manhattan chef weep. And Mancini earns it back three times over on a single Saturday afternoon, when throngs flood the area for a farmers’ market. ‘‘It’s insane,’’ Mancini says. ‘‘It’s like being at a sports stadium, crazy crowds all day long.’’

The Sussmans see the sweep of change, too, at Selden Standard, where the chef Andy Hollyday serves up duck congee, squid-ink chittara and sticky smoked lamb ribs. The old name of the neighborhood, Cass Corridor, used to be Motor City code for ‘‘stay the hell away.’’ Now the area has a Whole Foods.

With the sudden influx of creatives taking advantage of cheap rents and warehouse spaces, observers may grumble that parts of Detroit are in danger of being ruined by too many baristas and Baby Gaps. As if to offer a culinary corrective, Max and Eli climb back into the car. ‘‘I’m taking you to the trashiest place I can even take you,’’ Eli says. ‘‘The finish line draws near.’’

We head for the town of Royal Oak, where they plan to score a coney at National Coney Island, a spot where they used to linger for hours in high school. Royal Oak was once a wonderland of record stores and bookshops. ‘‘It’s really not like that anymore,’’ Max says, as we cruise past block after block of Starbucks and Qdoba signs. ‘‘It used to have a great deal of charm,’’ Eli says. ‘‘Now it looks like a mall.’’

Such are the perils of coming home. But their mood brightens as they spy a glow down the road. The red is radiant and garish, a beam of scarlet that seems to encompass an entire building and can probably be spotted from outer space. This is National, where a coney goes for $2.29. ‘‘It’s like a shining beacon,’’ says Eli. And into the parking lot they go.