Beijing—Wang Xue stood in the middle of his courtyard house, next to a pomegranate tree. It could have been a scene out of a Tang dynasty poem but for the sound of a jackhammer and a layer of construction dust that thinly caked the rows of potted plants and vine-covered awnings.

“The weather is warm, and with that comes construction season,” Mr. Wang, 53, said with a grimace at his home northeast of Tiananmen Square, in the middle of a Beijing neighborhood still filled with hutongs, or traditional Chinese alleyways.

Beijing’s courtyard homes and hutongs have been disappearing rapidly since China opened its economy in the 1980s, robbing the capital of some of its character.

In recent years, historians and residents have expressed concern over the razing of hutongs. They have been replaced by large-scale commercial projects, like the ones that went up around Qianmen Street in the south and are now being constructed around the Drum and Bell Towers north of the Forbidden City.

But just as threatening to the character of the hutongs are the small-scale construction projects, many of them ad hoc, that sidestep local planning laws and alter the atmosphere of the neighborhoods, say hutong historians and old-time denizens of Beijing. Some longtime hutong residents are complaining about their neighbors’ outsize renovations and discussing how the government is or is not cracking down on illegal construction that violates the aesthetics of Beijing’s hutongs.

Beijing’s astronomical housing prices make it tempting for homeowners to build up and out, even though it is illegal to change the exterior appearance of properties in designated heritage zones. The result is a shoddy mess of concrete, plastic awnings and tarpaulins, with an extra few floors or an extension going up in a day or two of surreptitious construction.

Disgruntled neighbors complain of a history of lax enforcement, but there are signs that Beijing officials may be trying to stop the illegal construction. Before the end of July, the local government in Dongcheng District, home to many of the hutongs, plans to demolish 192 of the haphazard construction projects, according to The Beijing Evening News, a state-run newspaper. Posters that warn against illegal construction are plastered along some alleyway walls.

To complicate efforts to contain the problem, Beijing’s courtyards are still a jumble of private and public housing — a legacy of the Mao era, when private property was seized by governments and families were forced to move. Historians estimate that more than half the properties in Beijing’s hutongs are classified as public housing, so those behind the illegal projects include both wealthy property owners and more humble local residents.

For some public-housing dwellers assigned to the hutongs, four generations are crammed into one or two rooms of a courtyard home. With no kitchens, they cook in the alleyways. With no indoor plumbing, many residents trek to public bathrooms each morning, delicately balancing full plastic buckets that served as overnight chamber pots. During the summer heat, alleyways resemble living rooms, with whole families congregating outside.

With space at a premium, families can either apply to move to public housing on the outskirts of Beijing or improvise in their current courtyard by building extensions to accommodate growing families.

Tensions are still high at No. 5 Dongsiliutiao Hutong, where city officials at the end of April ordered the bulldozing of a row of illegally constructed houses in which poorer residents lived. Furious, residents went to work within weeks to rebuild the structures.

“People are angry because this is a country where the rich get richer and the poor get poorer,” a 35-year-old man who lives in the neighborhood said on the condition of anonymity, because of fear of reprisal, as he puffed on a cigarette and leaned against a door frame across the street, next to piles of bricks and sand.

“Those people at No. 5 aren’t wealthy and aren’t well connected,” he added. “If they were, their place wouldn’t have been demolished at all.”

Those engaged in the construction describe it as a way of squeezing more relatives into a confined space.

“I’m building a second floor for my daughter,” said one 60-year-old who lives in a hutong just off bustling Ghost Street, which is filled with late-night restaurants lighted by red lanterns. “She’s about to get married, but real estate in Beijing is so expensive that we have no option. We can only build up.”

Across the street from Mr. Wang’s courtyard house, a two-story concrete monstrosity is almost complete, built by a local official, Mr. Wang said.

“It’s not just the dust, noise, and loss of privacy and direct sunlight,” he complained. “At a deeper level, this is about the loss of a fundamental part of Beijing’s character and culture.”

He said nothing had come of his attempts to report the building violation to the authorities. The local neighborhood committee and city management officials declined to be interviewed.

A man answering the door at the home with the illegal construction said he planned to rent the place for about $1,400 per month, perhaps to expatriates. “I know foreigners like having a rooftop terrace, and look at the view — there are traditional courtyard houses everywhere you look,” he said. “This is a very unique property.”

Hutongs can be traced back to the Yuan dynasty in the 13th century, when Kublai Khan ruled China. Back then, they were passageways between Mongolian yurts, some historians say. When the Communists founded the People’s Republic of China in 1949, some historians also considered Beijing the best-preserved medieval city in the world. But soon Mao Zedong and other officials ordered the destruction of vast parts of old Beijing, including the ancient city walls. Owners were evicted. After the Cultural Revolution, officials were often unable to return the hutong homes to their rightful owners because those owners were terrified of retribution or had fled Beijing or been killed.

Some preservationists argue that the government needs to privatize all hutong courtyards and revert Beijing’s property laws to pre-Communism statutes.

This recent round of attempted demolitions is a step in the right direction, said He Shuzhong, the founder of the Beijing Cultural Heritage Protection Center.

“But it is crucial for the government to prevent these constructions from even being erected in the first place,” he said. “Most important, it shouldn’t just be average residents who are targeted in this round of demolitions. Government offices, large corporations, the military — they must all be treated the same way.”