HONG KONG — Economists say the Federal Reserve’s decision to keep pumping money into the American economy is only a temporary reprieve for Asia — one that could tempt policy makers in the region to put off the structural changes they believe are essential to improve long-term growth prospects across the region.

For much of the past five years, Asia has been feasting on the money that flowed in as investors, leery of low yields in the West, poured into the region. Deprived of urgency in attracting inflows, many countries spent much of that time doing very little to lower hurdles to investment, cut back on red tape or reduce the dominance of state-owned businesses, analysts have long complained.

Many now fear that the continued flow of cheap cash and signs of renewed vigor in China could prompt still more delays.

“As long as money is cheap, there is less pressing need for structural reforms,” said Frederic Neumann, co-head of Asian economics at HSBC in Hong Kong.

The region can cope with rising indebtedness — another issue that worries many analysts — he said, even if interest rates creep up. “But you cannot have slowing productivity growth and rising debt — that’s a combination that is not sustainable, and that could come to a head in the next two to three years unless policy makers implement far-reaching structural reforms.”

Asia’s emerging economies are, on the whole, better positioned than they were during the financial crisis that shook the region in 1997 and 1998.

More debt is now in local currencies, rather than dollars, meaning that weakening local currencies do not bring a painful increase in debt servicing costs, analysts say. The region’s banks are more robust than they were in the 1990s. And foreign exchange reserves are higher than they were then, even though some countries, like India, have been selling dollars to prop up their plunging currencies in recent months.

Moreover, more dynamic growth in Japan, where an economy that has been languishing for decades is now picking up speed, could ultimately help make up for flagging capital inflows from the West.

Still, some analysts say, many of the region’s developing economies need more overhauls to ensure that the capital inflows that have become increasingly important for growth in recent years keep coming. The issues vary from country to country.

Infrastructure shortfalls, for example, are most pronounced in Indonesia and India, but they are also prominent in Vietnam, the Philippines and Thailand. India’s investment in the power sector, for example, has failed to keep up with the nation’s growing need for electricity — its generating capacity is only about one-quarter that of China’s, according to International Energy Agency statistics. Frequent power failures force many businesses to scale back production or resort to expensive diesel-powered generators.

In many countries, including China, often inefficient state-owned businesses dominate the market and make it difficult for smaller, privately owned companies to operate. Red tape and restrictions on acquiring land or businesses impede foreign investment in many countries. And fuel subsidies have sapped the budgets of countries like India, Thailand and Malaysia.

The recent exodus of foreign funds from emerging Asia — caused by the first hints, in May, that the Fed might soon reduce its support of the U.S. economy — highlighted the need to press ahead with changes and prompted some action. India and Indonesia, for example, recently raised interest rates. Those moves could hurt economic growth but are key to instilling confidence in their battered currencies. Malaysia and Indonesia have lowered fuel subsidies in a bid to ease the burden on their stretched budgets and regain investor confidence.

Such structural tweaks have been few and far between, many economists argue, and need to be accelerated. “We have seen just a few tentative first steps — not enough to turn things around in Asia,” said Mr. Neumann, the HSBC economist.

But with elections looming in India and Indonesia next year and the Fed now signaling that the times of easy cash are not quite over, the incentive for more action could be limited, analysts fear.

“A risk that we will be closely monitoring, especially as several elections are approaching,” Asia economists at Nomura in Singapore wrote in a research note, “is whether a return of strong capital inflows reduces the market discipline of Asian governments and policy makers, allowing them to revert to populist, pro-growth expansionary policies and neglect supply-side structural reforms.”

And Taimur Baig, chief Asia economist at Deutsche Bank in Singapore, cautioned that the “window of respite” could cause some countries to push back their fiscal and monetary adjustments.

They worried that the rally in asset prices could reignite problems like property price bubbles and credit growth, which had begun to abate in many parts of Asia.