A TRADITIONAL ISLAND VILLA ON THE SOUTHEASTERN COAST

$3.97 MILLION (2.9 MILLION EUROS)

This house overlooks the beaches of Lia and Kalafati on the tranquil southeastern part of Mykonos. It was built in 1998 in the typical style of the Greek islands, with thick whitewashed walls, exposed wooden ceiling beams, organic architectural forms and an assortment of shaded terraces and nooks that encourage socializing and relaxing. Modern touches include  air-conditioning, under-floor heating and a built-in sound system.

The property, about 1.3 acres, has four separate living units offering a total of five bedrooms, said Nicolas Mugni, the owner of Demeures de Grèce, a real estate agency based in Athens that is listing the property. In addition to the main house, there is an attached guest apartment; a small, rustic cottage that predates the other structures; and a cottage adjacent to the pool.

The main villa is earthquake-resistant, Mr. Mugni said. To accomplish that goal, the foundation and walls are reinforced concrete and brick that have been finished with stucco.

On the first floor are a living room, a dining area with a fireplace, a kitchen with electric range and a study. An en-suite master bedroom has a terrace with views over the Aegean Sea. Another en-suite bedroom is on the second floor.

The cottage, set in a grove of olive trees, is reached by a wooden walkway, and has one en-suite bedroom, as does the guest apartment. The cottage next to the heated pool has a double bed; a hammam, or steam room; and gym equipment.

The property is about five minutes’ drive to Lia, the nearest beach; amenities, including shopping and tavernas, are in the town of Ano Mera, which is 10 minutes by car. Mykonos airport, with flights to many European cities, is 20 minutes away. The town of Mykonos, with its night life and world-class restaurants, is about 25 minutes’ drive.

MARKET OVERVIEW

The international jet-set appeal of Mykonos has helped the island escape some of Greece’s economic woes. Prices have fallen since 2008, real estate agents said, but sales never completely stopped, and a new wave of buyers from the Middle East has helped compensate for the loss of the Greek market.

The most desirable parts of the island are along the west coast, close to the airport and Mykonos town. Beachfront villas there with spectacular views can sell for well over $5 million, said Roi Deldimou, the director of the Mykonos office of Beauchamp Estates. “Everybody specifies sea view, sunset view, proximity to town and beach access,” Ms. Deldimou said.  “But there are only a few properties like that.”

Buyers can find smaller villas on the west coast with lesser views, or properties on the northern and southern coasts, for $2.5 million to about $5 million, agents said. Below that price range, the best properties tend to be part of a cluster of three or four villas that share a common outdoor space with a swimming pool.

Those prices might be as much as 40 percent lower than before the European recession started in 2008, agents said, but the drop appears to have been arrested in the last two years.

“I don’t think we can say we’re in a rebound yet,” said Yannis Ploumis of Ploumis-Sotiropoulos  real estate in Athens, a Christie’s affiliate. “I think we are expecting a good year. Slowly the market is moving. It never stopped completely, because Mykonos is really an international destination.”

Ms. Deldimou sounded similarly optimistic. “Last year was the best year in the last five years at least. This year is promising,” she said. “That will start to affect the prices, lead them a little higher, but not something dramatic, I think.”

And there are signs, albeit small ones, that international investors have more confidence in the Greek economy.

“I think the government has proved to be resilient,” Mr. Ploumis said. “The fear that Greece would leave the euro zone has passed. Perhaps the real economy and people have not felt it yet, but it’s very much in the air.”

WHO BUYS ON MYKONOS

“In the past few years we have worked exclusively with the foreign market,” Mr. Ploumis said. European buyers tend to come from Britain, France, Germany and Italy, he said, with a sizable contingent of Americans, many with Greek ancestors.

In recent years, agents said, Mykonos has become popular with buyers from the Middle East — in particular Egypt, Israel and Lebanon — who are looking for an escape from the region’s turmoil. “There is uncertainty in their countries,” Ms. Deldimou said. “For all these people, it is quite easy to be here. It’s more or less the same climate: the sea, the sun.”

She said buyers are looking both for a vacation home for themselves, and to take advantage of Mykonos’s strong rental market. “They always consider the income they are going to have from the property they are going to buy, which is really good.”

BUYING BASICS

There are few restrictions on foreign buyers, agents said. Ms. Deldimou said buyers need to secure a Greek bank account and obtain a tax identification number, a process she described as “very simple.”

All transactions are handled by a notary, who processes the paperwork and ensures that taxes are paid. While a lawyer is not necessary, agents strongly advised that buyers retain one.

Prospective buyers should budget 5 percent to 7 percent over the selling price for taxes and fees, agents said. Costs include a transfer tax, which was lowered to 3 percent from 10 percent as of Jan. 1; notary and lawyer fees of about 1.5 percent each; and commission to a buyers’ agent — if one is being used — of about 2 percent.

WEBSITES

Greece tourism: visitgreece.gr

Mykonos: mykonos.gr

LANGUAGE AND CURRENCY

Greek; euro (1 euro = $1.37)

TAXES AND FEES

Annual property taxes are about $1,400, Mr. Mugni said.

CONTACT

Nicolas Mugni, Demeures de Grèce, demeuresdegrece.com, 011- 30 210 99 40 826