LONDON — In the covert existence that Julian Assange adopted as founder of the secrecy-busting organization WikiLeaks, he made a lifestyle of sleeping on borrowed sofas and fostering a legend for himself as a man without a place or a country to call home.

But now, after Ecuador’s decision on Thursday to grant him asylum and Britain’s vow to arrest him the moment he steps out of the sanctuary he has found in Ecuador’s embassy in London, the Australian-born Mr. Assange seems at last to have secured a fixed address. Considering the diplomatic impasse and the vehemence of opinion on both sides, it is one that could be his for months, or even years, if neither Ecuador nor Britain relents.

The address — 3 Hans Crescent — lies in the heart of London’s exclusive Knightsbridge district. Barely 50 yards from Mr. Assange’s safehouse is the men’s clothing section of Harrods department store, one of Europe’s most expensive places to shop.

But for all its attractions — denied him, in any case, by his confinement to the embassy — it is hardly the sanctuary that Mr. Assange would have chosen. In his vision, he has been the matchless pioneer of a movement set to transcend boundaries of nationality, custom and law, using WikiLeaks to tear down walls of secrecy and foster a new era of global transparency and justice.

The word he has used more than any other is “free.” But the situation in which he finds himself now is akin to a genteel prison, and one without limit of sentence. His quarters come with an air mattress laid on an office floor, and a window to gaze in the direction of London’s distant airports, and the possibility they represent of a flight to Ecuador, one of the few countries left where he would be beyond the reach of Interpol.

For now, that flight might as well be a million miles away, given the 20 or 30 Scotland Yard officers keeping a 24-hour vigil outside the embassy. Friends who have visited Mr. Assange say he has a computer and a broadband connection, at least one cellphone, and regular deliveries of takeout food, carefully inspected by the police.

Conceivably, Prime Minister David Cameron’s government could yet follow through on its warning to Ecuador before the asylum decision that it might invoke an obscure British law that would empower it to suspend the embassy’s immunity and send the police in to arrest Mr. Assange.

The government has been frustrated by his decision to trump a 20-month legal battle against extradition to Sweden to face questioning on allegations that he sexually abused two young women during a visit to Stockholm in 2010 — allegations he strenuously denies — by fleeing to the embassy. It was a battle he took all the way to to Britain’s Supreme Court and lost, after running up millions of dollars in mostly unpaid legal fees.

His decision to seek asylum in Ecuador, shortly before he was to have been escorted by the authorities aboard a flight to Sweden, entailed defaulting on a $240,000 bail bond posted by a group of wealthy supporters. He coupled this with a denunciation of the British legal system, which he cast as a corrupted tool of his enemies, the United States principal among them.

His case, articulated in a flow of unsigned WikiLeaks statements, has been that the “political persecution” he has suffered in the British courts has been aimed at getting him to Sweden so that he can be extradited onward to face serious charges in the United States for WikiLeaks’s role in securing and publishing tens of thousands of secret United States military and diplomatic cables in 2010.

The Obama administration has refused to say what plan it has, if any, to seek Mr. Assange’s extradition to the United States, where an American soldier, Pfc. Bradley Manning, faces a court-martial, and a potential life sentence, for what prosecutors have said was his role in transferring the documents to WikiLeaks.

WikiLeaks has shrunk substantially in the months that Mr. Assange has been fighting his legal battle, with many of its best computer programmers and Assange loyalists quitting in protest against what they have described as his highhanded manner, his elusiveness about what he has done with millions in donations, and the organization’s shift from one that declared itself to be a nonpartisan dropbox for whistle-blowers to an agency of the political left.

Still, Mr. Assange has his backers. “No one is going to terrorize us!” President Rafael Correa of Ecuador wrote via Twitter before offering Mr. Assange asylum. Outside the embassy in London, supporters chanted Mr. Assange’s name and waved placards hailing him as a hero of the world’s oppressed.

Inside, Mr. Assange told embassy officials, according to their account, that the ruling was “a significant victory for myself.” But he added, perhaps presciently, that “things will probably get more stressful now.”

That appeared to be a reference to the possibility of a raid on the embassy, though Britain’s foreign minister, William Hague, seemed to rule that out for the time being by telling reporters that Britain intended to pursue a “negotiated solution.”

The Cameron government appeared to have heeded anxious warnings from some of the country’s most eminent retired diplomats. Sir Anthony Brenton, a former ambassador to Russia, told the BBC that a British breach of diplomatic immunity, even if sanctioned in domestic law, would “make the world a very different place,” with diplomats everywhere vulnerable to punitive action by host governments.

In Ecuador, lawmakers convened a session on Thursday to discuss the standoff. There were more consultations in Washington among diplomats at the Organization of American States.

Still, there appeared to be little room for maneuver, with Mr. Hague saying “no one should be in any doubt” of Britain’s determination to fulfill its obligations to Sweden under Europe’s extradition law. For his part, Ricardo Patiño, the Ecuadorean foreign minister, said in Quito that Ecuador would insist that Britain give Mr. Assange safe passage out of the embassy to an Ecuador-bound flight.

There remained an important wild card — Mr. Assange himself — that suggested to some monitoring the situation that a sudden change in the plot could not be ruled out.

Idiosyncratic to the core, Mr. Assange, some backers say, is sure to have been busy conjuring up yet another twist — “tunneling out of the embassy, giving himself up, who knows?” as one old friend who has remained in touch with him expressed it.