Late last year, some 500 inhabitants of Samoa [1] had their birthday stolen. In a curious experiment in collective time travel, the entire Pacific island nation skipped Dec. 30, 2011, resulting in the seamless succession of the 29th by the 31st. By sacrificing one day - and those 500 birthdays [2] - Samoa was able to hop back across to the Asian side of the International Date Line, bringing its calendar in line with Australia, China and other major trading partners. Trade had also been the argument for the previous change, in the other direction: in 1892, Samoa celebrated two consecutive 4ths of July, to align itself with the American side of the Pacific [3].

Both Samoan adjustments are but two examples of the mind-boggling things that can mess up the seemingly straightforward act of timekeeping at or near the 180th meridian, ever since it was elevated to become the I.D.L. - the fixed borderline between the two calendar days that share the planet at any given time.

The date line is the logical consequence of the so-called Circumnavigator's Paradox, which was known to scientists [4] before it was witnessed for the first time by Antonio Pigafetta in the early 16th century. One of only 18 crew members out of 237 to survive Ferdinand Magellan's first circumnavigation of the globe [5], Pigafetta meticulously kept a diary throughout the voyage. When the ramshackle ship Victoria made landfall at the Cape Verde islands after almost three years' absence from lands accustomed to Western timekeeping [6], he noted:

On Wednesday, 9th July [1522], we sent the boat ashore to obtain provisions And we charged our men [that] they should ask what day it was. They were answered that it was Thursday, at which they were much amazed, for to us it was Wednesday, and we knew not how we had fallen into error. For every day I, being always in health, had written down each day without any intermission.

Pigafetta eventually wised up: "As we were told since, there had been no mistake, for we had always made our voyage westward and had returned to the same place of departure as the sun, wherefore the long voyage had brought the gain of twenty-four hours, as is clearly seen."

So how exactly does drawing a line across the Pacific solve this issue? Why isn't it enough merely to change the date at the stroke of midnight in each successive time zone? Because, if you think about it, that's logically impossible. With only a single line moving westward across the planet, what exactly is it separating? The same date from itself? No - it is precisely because midnight separates two dates from each other that we need two date lines to separate them, one moving and one fixed.

Picture that movable date line - the stroke of midnight - racing across the earth at the speed of one time zone an hour. When the clock strikes 12 [7] in the first zone west of the fixed date line, a new date is born in a sliver one time zone wide, stretching from pole to pole. As the hours tick away, that slice grows wider across the Earth's circumference. The new date races ahead of the sunrise, lighting up the east as the day races west. Inexorably, as the date circles the Earth to rejoin the fixed line, the "new" date becomes the "old" one, to be replaced in turn by the next one as the midnight hour once again crosses the date line [8].

So the need for a fixed date line was real (if not immediately obvious). But there is no reason it should run across the Pacific, except the convenience of avoiding populated areas. As it happens, its course was determined more or less by default. The I.D.L. is a byproduct of the International Meridian Conference of 1844. In October of that year, delegates from 25 countries convened in Washington to find "a meridian to be employed as a common zero of longitude [9] and standard of time reckoning throughout the world," and settled on the one going straight through the Greenwich Observatory, in the east of London. International acceptance of this Prime Meridian would eventually [10] streamline cartography, navigation and timekeeping.

Its anti-meridian, 180 degrees east (and west) of Greenwich [11], was the natural choice for a date line, but neither the International Meridian Conference, nor any other subsequent global committee, ever sanctioned its "official" use. As the English-American geographer George Davidson said at the end of the 19th century: "There is no International Date Line; the theoretical line is 180 degrees from Greenwich, but the line actually used is the result of agreement among the commercial steamships of the principal maritime countries."

That line, theoretical and straight, acquired many kinks and bends, first due to those agreements between steamship companies, dividing the Pacific into spheres of Asian and American zones of influence, and later due to the unilateral declarations of the navies and nations involved. As no international body regulates the course of the I.D.L., it can be changed by simple declaration by any party.

Up until the first half of the 19th century, the (even more) informal predecessor of the I.D.L. included the Philippines on the "American" side: it was then a Spanish colony, and most of its traffic and commerce was with Spanish South America. This put it at odds with most of its neighbors. Manila made the switch to the "Asian" side of the date line in 1845. But even after this so-called Philippine Adjustment, the approximate date line showed a large, westward-billowing bulge, skirting the islands of Japan, the Philippines and New Guinea.

After 1884, several adjustments knocked the anti-meridian into the shape we now recognize as the International Date Line. As the 180th meridian cuts the tail off Siberia's extreme east and in turn separates the westernmost Aleutian islands from the rest of Alaska, the line on its way down from the North Pole was provided with an eastward zig [12] and a westward zag that placed each neatly in the more appropriate time zone - and managing to run in between the neighboring islands of Big Diomede (Russia) and Little Diomede (United States): separated by no more than 2.5 miles of the freezing waters of the Bering Strait, the islands are nevertheless forever and a day locked in two different dates [13].

Below the Aleutian wedge, the I.D.L. resumes its course south along the 180th meridian, until it approaches the island nation of Kiribati, a collection of 32 atolls and one island straddling the Equator, sprawled out over 5 million square miles of Pacific Ocean. Until 1995, this former British colony was divided by the I.D.L. By extending the border eastward - almost to 150 degrees west, farther east than Honolulu - Kiribati eliminated this nuisance. As a bonus, the Line Islands in the country's east have the most advanced time on earth, becoming the first land on the planet to greet each new day.

South of Kiribati, the I.D.L. again turns west, dividing Asian' from "American" Samoa, but staying east of the 180th meridian to include islands closely linked with Australia and New Zealand in their time zone. Near the uninhabited Antipodes Islands, the I.D.L. re-finds the 180th meridian, and continues to the South Pole [14].

The International Date Line may not be an officially sanctioned border, and its raison d'être rather counter-intuitive, but it is essential for good, global time-keeping. Its unofficial nature allows its bordering nations to switch sides according to political and economic expedience. And its genesis as an afterthought to the Prime Meridian recalls a time when Europe was at the center of the world. In fact, Greenwich and the International Date Line can be seen as carbon copies to the meridians of Tordesillas and Zaragoza, which divided the world between Spain and Portugal in the 16th century [15].

Frank Jacobs is a London-based author and blogger. He writes about cartography, but only the interesting bits.

[1] In 1899, the Tripartite Convention separated the previously independent Samoan islands into a German and an American part. German Samoa was taken over by New Zealand in 1914, after which it was known as Western Samoa, initially also after its independence in 1962. The name-change to simply "Samoa" raised a storm of protest in American Samoa, which felt it as a slight to its own Samoan identity. In American Samoa, which remains an unincorporated territory of the United States, the preferred nomenclature for its independent neighbor still is "Western Samoa."

[2] There are about 180,000 Samoans; 1/365th of that total, about 500 people, would have missed their birthday on Dec. 30.

[3] American business interests persuaded Samoa's king, Malietoa Laupepa, to adopt American reckoning. July 4 was picked as a symbolic date for this temporal realignment. Margaret Isabella Stevenson (mother of the writer Robert Louis Stevenson), described the event in her "Letters from Samoa": "In former days, communication was entirely with Australia, and it was simpler and in every way more natural to follow the Australian calendar; but now that so many vessels come from San Francisco, the powers that be have decided to set this right, and to adopt the date that belongs to our actual geographical position. To this end, therefore, we are ordered to keep two Mondays in this week, which will set us straight."

[4] First reported as a theoretical phenomenon by the 14th-century Syrian geographer Abu al-Fida (a. k. a. Abulfeda) in his "Taqwim al-Buldan" ("Portrait of the Countries"), and repeated, later that same century, by the French scholar Nicolas Oresme. Briefly: if X stays put, and Y and Z circle the Earth westward and eastward respectively to meet up with X after he has counted 10 days, Y will have counted 9 days and Z will have counted 11. The phenomenon played a crucial role in Jules Verne's "Around the World in 80 Days." Curiously, Abulfeda, Oresme and Verne all have lunar craters named after them.

[5] Magellan, who began his expedition in 1519, discovered the strait named after him, and named the Pacific Ocean. He was killed in the Philippines in 1521. For centuries, an imaginary southern continent that graced many maps bore his name. See Strange Maps No. 575.

[6] Western time was still kept according to the Julian calendar, devised by Julius Caesar. It was superseded in 1582 by the Gregorian calendar, which has since been adopted by most of the world. On its introduction, the Gregorian calendar required a leap of 10 days to correct its more-imperfect predecessor's aberration. The dates between Oct. 4 and 15 were scrapped, producing a lot of unhappy birthdays.

[7] At that singular moment, the entire earth would be covered by one date only - were it not for daylight saving time, and a few time zones with shifted time-keeping. These zones, near the I.D.L., result in not two but three different calendar days being in use in a two-hour window every 24 hours.

[8] Meaning that, even if a day lasts only 24 hours in any given time zone, every date exists for 48 hours between the first and last time zones on the planet.

[9] Before 1884, a confusing number of prime meridians were in use, maintained mostly as tent poles to keep aloft the canvas of national pride. There were prime meridians of Paris, Rome, St. Petersburg, Washington and even Antwerp, Belgium, where Mercator and Ortelius published their first atlases. The Greenwich meridian was proclaimed in 1851; in spite of other nations' pride, British sea power meant that two-thirds of ships worldwide used it even before the 1884 conference.

[10] Support for Greenwich wasn't unanimous. France and Brazil abstained from the vote (and Santo Domingo, now the Dominican Republic, voted against it). The French stubbornly continued to use the Paris meridian for navigation until 1914 - and still mark it on some maps.

[11] Equidistant from Greenwich in both directions, this meridian also doubles as the left and right borders of the classic Eurocentric map, which places the Prime Meridian at its center.

[12] Wrangel Island, off the northern Siberian coast, is cut in half by the 180th meridian; in 1921, the Icelandic-Canadian explorer Vilhjalmur Stefansson claimed it (or perhaps only the part east of the 180th meridian) for Canada. A map by the British Hydrographic Department shows the I.D.L. bisecting Wrangel, possibly to bolster the Canadian claim. By 1926, Russian settlers had dispelled Canada's shaky claim.

[13] Somewhat reminiscent of the setup for Umberto Eco's novel "The Island of the Day Before."

[14] Had it followed a straight line, the I.D.L. would have been 12,426 miles long.

[15] For more on these, see these two earlier episodes of this series.