BEIRUT, Lebanon — Scores of muddied and waterlogged gunshot victims, most of them men in their 20s and 30s, were found dead in a suburb of Syria’s contested northern city of Aleppo on Tuesday. Insurgents and the government accused one another of carrying out the killings in what appeared to be the latest civil war atrocity.

Videos posted by opponents of President Bashar al-Assad seemed to show that many had been shot in the back of the head while their hands were bound. The Syrian Observatory for Human Rights, an activist organization based in Britain with a network of contacts in Syria, said at least 50 bodies had been located, scattered along the banks of a small river in the Bustan al-Qasr neighborhood, which is mostly under rebel control. Later reports put the tally much higher.

Al Jazeera quoted a commander from the insurgent Free Syrian Army, identified as Capt. Abu Sada, as saying that there could be more than 100 bodies, with many still submerged in the murky river, and that all had been “executed by the regime.”

Syria’s state news agency, SANA, later posted a report on its Web site that blamed the insurgent Islamist fighters of the Nusra Front, and said the killings added to “a series of brutal massacres perpetrated by the terrorist groups against unarmed civilians.”

The videos emerged as the United Nations reported a sharp increase in the number of refugees known officially to have fled Syria, increasing the total in neighboring countries to more than 700,000 from 500,000 in December.

The Syrian conflict began in March 2011 as a peaceful protest, but has since spiraled into civil war.

In Geneva, one agency, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, reported an “unrelenting flow of refugees” across Syria’s borders, principally into Jordan, Lebanon, Iraq and Turkey.

In Washington, President Obama announced that the United States would donate a further $155 million to aid Syrian refugees, bringing the total pledged by the country as humanitarian aid to $365 million. But that is a fraction of the $1.5 billion that the United Nations says is needed over the next six months as it issues urgent appeals for more international funding.

At the United Nations, Lakhdar Brahimi, the joint United Nations and Arab League envoy trying to mediate a settlement, gave the Security Council a pessimistic assessment.

With the Council deadlocked, Syria grows as a threat to the whole region, which should spur the Council to action, Mr. Brahimi said. “Syria is being destroyed bit by bit, and by destroying Syria the region is being pushed into a situation that is extremely bad for the entire world,” he said.

On Tuesday night, Russia was hosting a dinner for Mr. Brahimi with the ambassadors from the five permanent members of the Security Council, but there seemed to be little hope for a breakthrough. Russia and China have together vetoed three Council resolutions focused on Syria since the conflict erupted.

“The same issues that have stymied the Council to date remain unresolved, so there is no obvious way forward,” said Susan E. Rice, the American ambassador to the United Nations.