WASHINGTON — In its most upbeat economic assessment since the recession, the Federal Reserve cited “solid” economic growth and “strong” job growth in a statement issued Wednesday that suggested the Fed remains on course to raise its benchmark interest rate as soon as June.

The optimistic tone of the statement was leavened, however, by the Fed’s acknowledgment that inflation remains unusually sluggish, and that prices are likely to rise even more slowly in the coming months, largely because of lower energy prices.

But the statement issued by the Federal Open Market Committee reiterated that Fed officials expect inflation to rebound “as the labor market improves further and the transitory effect of lower energy prices and other factors dissipate.”

The weakness of the global economy received only a passing mention.

The statement appeared to rule out the possibility that the Fed would raise rates earlier than June. It said the Fed would remain patient, and the Fed chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, has said that means the Fed would wait at least two meetings before acting, pushing the earliest liftoff date to the year’s fourth meeting, in June.

As expected, the Fed removed from the statement the outdated description that it would hold rates near zero for a “considerable time” after the end of its bond-buying program. The Fed completed its last round of purchases in October.

The statement was passed by a unanimous vote, a contrast with the three dissents at the Federal Open Market Committee’s previous meeting in December. The change, however, most likely does not reflect greater internal harmony. Instead, the three regional reserve bank presidents who dissented in December rotated out of voting seats on the committee, and were replaced by three members of the majority.

The Fed’s upbeat assessment came against a backdrop of a labor market that is on the mend. Average monthly job gains have increased in each of the last five years, reaching 246,000 per month last year. The unemployment rate fell to 5.6 percent in December, closing in on its prerecession level of around 5 percent.

The economic expansion also has gained strength as confident consumers spend more, heartened by the rise in employment and the fall of oil prices.

But the Federal Reserve’s chairwoman, Janet L. Yellen, and her allies remain reluctant to start raising the Fed’s benchmark interest rate, primarily because inflation remains weak. The Labor Department’s Consumer Price Index rose just 0.8 percent during 2014, the slowest pace during a period of economic growth in half a century.

The Fed’s goal is to keep prices rising at an annual rate of about 2 percent, as part of its effort to support economic growth and grease the wheels of commerce. But it has not met that target in more than two years, and is increasingly unlikely to achieve it this year.

Wage growth also remains weak as companies continue to find an abundant supply of potential employees. Recent research by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago suggests that the decline in the unemployment rate overstates the recovery of the labor market because some people who have stopped looking for work are likely to return as the recovery gains strength.

Moreover, those who continue to look for work are disproportionately older and better educated, groups with historically lower rates of unemployment, suggesting the Fed may be able to push the overall unemployment rate below 5 percent without unleashing inflation.

Some analysts therefore are increasingly skeptical that the Fed will stick to its midsummer timetable for raising its benchmark rate. David Mericle, an economist at Goldman Sachs, wrote last week that the deceleration of inflation is likely to continue into summer. The Fed, he said, “would find it hard to justify” a rate increase under those circumstances.

Goldman still predicts the Fed will raise rates later this year. Morgan Stanley, meanwhile, predicted Monday that the Fed will not raise rates until 2016.

“We believe the FOMC would risk entrenching inflation expectations at levels inconsistent with its 2 percent goal if it were to push forward with rate hikes as early as June,” Morgan’s economic forecasters wrote in a research note, referring to the Fed’s policy-making Federal Open Market Committee.

Measures of market expectations derived from asset prices suggest that investors share this skepticism. By Morgan Stanley’s reckoning, prices reflect an expectation that the first rate increase will not happen until after the Fed’s September meeting.