DALKEY, IRELAND — Almost every seafront house in and around Dublin has a road or a train track that separates it from the water.

But 2 Vico Terrace, in the village of Dalkey, has direct access to Dublin Bay, even though the house is perched on a cliff top, about 30 meters above the shore. Steps, accessible only from the three houses along the terrace, lead to a private beach where dolphins and porpoises cruise by.

The area, sometimes called Little Naples, does have the look of a Dublin Riviera about it, with cliffs, bougainvillea and winding roads that have names like Sorrento Terrace and Capri. Light bounces off the sea, and the warm microclimate allows Mediterranean palm trees and flora to flourish. 2 Vico Terrace has a fruit-producing fig tree as well as olive trees in a rock garden designed by a former owner, Hilary Heron, a sculptor.

It is not often these days that a semi-detached house around Dublin has a selling price of €1.6 million, or about $2 million. But Des Lalor, the real estate agent handling the sale, said a larger house down the road sold for €2.4 million this year — and, he said, “I have an awful lot of cash buyers coming to me who are not really worried about the price if they find the right house.”

Bono lives at the other end of Vico Road, and a pink house visible from Vico Terrace belongs to the Edge, as the U2 guitarist David Evans is known. But Alan Repko, who has put 2 Vico Terrace up for sale, said he, not the rock stars, was the noisy one, holding beach parties with bonfires and music sessions.

The house, covering 2,500 square feet, or 232 square meters, on three levels, was built about 1870. The exterior of the house is white stucco, with mahogany-framed windows.

It stands on land of one-tenth of an acre, or 405 square meters.

The ground floor includes a sitting room, kitchen/breakfast room and a pine- and glass-lined sunroom. Large windows overlook the bay, allowing sunlight to flood the rooms; the floors are pine. Upstairs, there are three bedrooms. The master bedroom has a cast iron fireplace and windows with views of Bray Head and the Great and Little Sugar Loaf mountains in the distance.

The lower floor, once a wine cellar, has been converted into self-contained guest space, with a kitchen, bedroom, bathroom and sauna. An attached garage could be converted to another bedroom.

The interior is traditional but, Mr. Lalor said, the house is not on any historical list, so alterations would not be limited by preservation regulations. And, he said, “there is room for updating the house with floor-to-ceiling windows.”

Mr. Repko, a New York native, moved his computing and telecommunications company to Dublin in the 1980s to take advantage of Ireland’s corporate tax rates. He fell in love with the view at Vico Terrace and bought the house in 1983. Now retired, Mr. Repko has moved to Portugal, where he is renovating an old winery as his new home.

At first, he said, the sound of the waves unsettled him: “A boy from Brooklyn. What did I know about the sea?”

But before long, Mr. Repko said, he had “converted 100 percent into a nautical being.” He joined some neighbors who swim year-round, kept a sailboard and a canoe on the shorefront and took up sailing in the nearby yachting town of Dun Laoghaire.

He enthuses about all the area’s attractions, not just the seafaring ones.

“You don’t ever need get in your car,” Mr. Repko said. “You can go to great pubs and restaurants in Dalkey village and walk home. Killiney Hill, immediately behind us, is great for walking and jogging.”

High-end properties, even those with views of the water, are always scarce in Dalkey and Killiney. But not far from Vico Terrace, in Killiney, is Fernside, a 7,000-square-foot stone house formerly owned by Damon Hill, the 1996 Formula One champion. It is on the market for €2.5 million.

Fernside, set in mature gardens covering 0.8 hectares, or 2 acres, has panoramic views over Dublin Bay, stretching to the Wicklow Mountains on the right and to the northern Dublin suburb of Howth on the left. On some crisp winter days, it is possible to glimpse Snowdonia mountain, in Wales, said Kathy Crowe, the real estate agent in Dun Laoghaire with Gunne, which is handling the sale.

The house, with three levels, was designed by Thomas Newenham Deane and Benjamin Woodward, Dublin architects who were also responsible for parts of Trinity College and Oxford University. Fernside was built in 1861, its tiered roof and high chimneys displaying a Jacobean flair typical of the architects’ designs.

The entrance hall is lined with the original black, red and white Victorian tiles.

The lower floor, which is visible at the front of the house but sunk into the garden at the rear, features a mirrored gym, a family room, a children’s playroom and a utility room.

On the main floor, the reception rooms have ceilings of more than 4 meters and all the original cornices and fireplaces. There are wide pine floorboards in the dining room, parquet in the study and maple boards in the drawing room. The study and dining room have French doors that lead to balconies over the garden.

Upstairs, the master bedroom has three large windows overlooking the bay, as the front-facing rooms on this level offer the property’s best sea views. It also has a walk-in wardrobe and an en suite bathroom. This level includes four more bedrooms and two baths.

Ms. Crowe said the interest in Fernside had bolstered her optimism about the Dublin market in general, which plummeted after the 2008 global downturn. She said she was completing the sales of two homes, both of which are selling for more than the asking prices.

“There’s been a real turnaround,” she said. “It started in the last quarter of last year and the trend seems to be continuing.”