LAST January, Amy Chua got an unexpected e-mail just before an excerpt from her provocative child-rearing manual, “Battle Hymn of the Tiger Mother,” appeared in The Wall Street Journal. It was from Wendi Murdoch, the wife of Rupert Murdoch, whose News Corporation owns The Journal.

“She wanted her daughters to come to New Haven and meet my daughters,” Ms. Chua said in a phone interview. Like the Murdoch girls, Ms. Chua’s daughters are fluent in Chinese and English, and have a Chinese mother who grew up with a mother of her own who was unimaginably strict by Western standards.

“She was asking for advice like, ‘How do you get a child to practice piano for more than one hour a day?’ ” Ms. Chua recalled of their first meeting. “She parents almost identically to the way I do.”

In return for Ms. Chua’s parenting tips, Mrs. Murdoch gave the author some advice. After the excerpt ran in The Journal, Ms. Chua found herself the subject of an angry backlash on mommy blogs, morning TV and newspaper columns. A lot of friends tried to console Ms. Chua, but Mrs. Murdoch was different.

“She was like: ‘Why do you care what people think? You have two wonderful daughters. Get over it,’ ” Ms. Chua recalled.

If anyone is qualified to give advice on developing a thick skin, it’s Wendi Deng Murdoch, 43, who harbors an ambition and busyness that would most likely exhaust even the most determined of Manhattan socialities.

Since the couple wed in 1999, Mrs. Murdoch, the third wife of Rupert Murdoch and 38 years his junior, has been viewed with suspicion and skepticism. At best, she was described as a “trophy wife” and at worse a “gold digger.”

Lately, the intricate narrative of how Deng Wen Di from Jiangsu province in eastern China became Wendi Murdoch of the Rockefeller triplex on Fifth Avenue (and other homes in Beverly Hills and Carmel, Calif.; London; Cavan, South Australia; and Beijing) has taken another turn.

Even as her husband’s company, News Corporation, faces scrutiny over a phone-hacking scandal at its British newspapers, Mrs. Murdoch has emerged with her own independent career and has immersed herself in a social circle that includes David Geffen, Larry Ellison, Tony Blair, Nicole Kidman and Bono, one that is often free of her husband’s presence.

Her first film, “Snow Flower and the Secret Fan,” based on the best-selling book and produced with Florence Sloan, the Chinese wife of another media mogul, the former MGM studio chief Harry E. Sloan, came out in 2011. The pair are close to signing a deal with Sony Pictures to distribute their second movie based on the memoir “Journey of a Thousand Miles,” by the Chinese pianist Lang Lang.

Through a family spokesman, Mrs. Murdoch declined to be interviewed for this article, as did other members of the Murdoch family. But many of her friends were willing to discuss Mrs. Murdoch’s new and, they say, more accurate public persona.

They describe someone who is, above almost all things, a world-class networker, collecting powerful friends and brokering connections. She hosts annual dinner parties with powerful women, hosts book parties for friends, and regularly holds get-togethers. When Tony and Cherie Blair visited Beijing in 2009, Mrs. Murdoch organized a dinner party with Chinese power brokers. (Mrs. Blair is now among those suing News Corporation’s British newspaper unit in the phone hacking scandal.)

In May 2011, when Hugh Jackman, a close friend who made a cameo in “Snow Flower and the Secret Fan,” was in early performances of his one-man show in San Francisco, the project was largely a low-profile one. Until Mrs. Murdoch got involved.

“As a surprise Wendi flew in with about a dozen of the most influential people in the business,” Mr. Jackman wrote in an e-mail. “She is the best publicist anyone could ever have.” The show later moved to Broadway.

If there was a single moment that crystallized Mrs. Murdoch’s ascendancy in the public imagination, it was during her husband’s testimony last July before a British parliamentary subcommittee over the widespread phone hacking that happened at one of his newspapers, The News of the World. Wearing a pink blazer, she sat behind him, then instinctively vaulted out of her chair to protect her husband from a protester’s pie attack.

“Until the cream-pie incident, she’d really been branded the classic younger wife with a tinge of racism and stereotyping,” said Andrew Butcher, a former senior communications executive at News Corporation. “That turned everything around for her.”

“It seemed to finally give the marriage legitimacy,” he added.

Friends said they were not surprised at all to see Mrs. Murdoch, a former competitive volleyball player, jump to her husband’s defense. “Nothing characterizes her more than that moment,” said Diane von Furstenberg, a longtime friend whose husband, Barry Diller, worked for Mr. Murdoch. “She is protective and fierce and not afraid of anything.”

Sally Shan, a managing director of HarbourVest Partners, a global private equity firm, and Mrs. Murdoch’s roommate when they attended the Yale School of Management, said, “I saw that and thought, That’s my Wendi.”

IF Wendi Deng Murdoch had not married the world’s most powerful media mogul, her life would probably read like an idealized version of the American immigrant story.

The third daughter of a Guangzhou factory director moves to the United States, and gets a job at the Sichuan Garden in Westwood, Calif., for $20 a day and all the leftover soup she can eat. She takes night classes at a commuter college, gets accepted by an Ivy League school, enters the media business and eventually finds herself walking red carpets and holding dinner parties at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. But this is no typical immigrant tale.

After Liz Smith announced in The New York Post in 1998 that Mr. Murdoch and his wife of 31 years, Anna, had amicably separated, the company crafted a widely accepted narrative that Mr. Murdoch and Wendi Deng met later, after he and Anna were already separated, when Ms. Deng accompanied Mr. Murdoch on a trip to Beijing.

In reality, they met months earlier during a town-hall-style session at Star TV, according to a person who was close to Mr. Murdoch at the time. Employees, gathered in the company’s glistening new Kowloon headquarters in Hong Kong, lobbed mostly softball questions at Mr. Murdoch. Then Ms. Deng stood up.

“Why is your China strategy so bad?” she asked Mr. Murdoch in her fractured English, according to a person close to News Corporation who attended the meeting. Unsatisfied with his answer, she approached him after the meeting, and they discussed media and China and business, all things that, coming from a younger, attractive woman, apparently proved an aphrodisiac to Mr. Murdoch.

He had been taken aback at how direct Ms. Deng was (friends say she still has almost no brain-to-mouth filter) and how much she enjoyed talking business, according to people close to the couple.

In 1999, 82 guests, watched as the couple wed on board Mr. Murdoch’s 155-foot yacht, the Morning Glory, in New York Harbor.

In the early days of marriage, much was made of Mr. Murdoch’s transformation: his shoddy hair-dye job, Prada suits, workout regimen and new SoHo loft. But less noted was the transformation happening to his wife. Mrs. Murdoch’s friends like to talk about how the money has not fundamentally changed the brash, unfiltered, funny woman Mr. Murdoch first met in Kowloon. But in other ways, Mr. Murdoch’s billions have significantly transformed her.

She used to wash her clothes and face with the same soap, said a 2008 Vogue article, and seldom wore makeup, much less luxuriated in the perks of privilege — like the private yoga classes with her friends Kathy Freston and Arianna Huffington — she indulges in today. At Yale, she would stake out Filene’s Basement to procure designer gowns on the cheap. Today, she is regularly photographed wearing Rodarte and Prada.

Mrs. Murdoch quickly and giddily embraced the trappings of great wealth. While her husband conducted business in various European capitals, she would travel with him and shop for glassware and cutlery and curtains to stock her new homes. In addition to their loft in SoHo, the Murdochs transformed an old hutong in Beijing into a courtyard oasis decorated with art by Chinese artists.

At the same time, she tried to find a place for herself in the family business, brokering meetings in China and weighing in on MySpace’s Chinese operations. As head of Star TV, James Murdoch worked with his stepmother to try to repair News Corporation’s standing in China. In turn, Mrs. Murdoch earned James’s respect, and he became the first of Mr. Murdoch’s four grown children to accept his father’s third marriage, according to a person close to the Murdoch family.

Still, there were bumps. The first came in 2000, when The Wall Street Journal, not yet owned by News Corporation, published a 4,000-word front-page article about her. It described how, in 1988 at age 19, she had moved to Los Angeles with a married couple, Jake and Joyce Cherry, to learn English. Mr. Cherry and Wendi Deng had an affair, according to the article, and she married him in 1990. The marriage lasted two years seven months, according to Los Angeles court records. In that time, she got a green card and enrolled at California State University, Northridge.

Mr. Murdoch was furious, according to people close to News Corporation who would not discuss the article on the record, even though it was the kind of article he would have loved — had it been in one of his newspapers and about someone else’s third wife.

The article and subsequent follow-ups by other publications branded Mrs. Murdoch as a calculating seductress for much of the next decade.

Then in 2006, there was an infamous marital battle when Mr. Murdoch declared in a TV interview with Charlie Rose that while Grace and Chloe, his daughters with Wendi, would have an equal economic interest in the family’s trust, they would not have the same voting rights as his children from his previous marriages, Prudence, Elisabeth, Lachlan and James.

Wendi Murdoch was enraged. It was the first she had heard of that decision.

“He became this typical husband whose wife threatened to leave him,” said a person close to News Corporation who would not speak for attribution about the Murdochs’ relationship. “It was surreal.”

They worked through it, and by all accounts, Wendi has had a hugely positive impact on Rupert. She will openly roll her eyes at him when he’s out of line and tell him when he’s wrong, even while the two are in public.

“She has a great upbeat personality and is one of the few people who can keep Rupert Murdoch under control,” said Mr. Butcher, the former News Corporation spokesman. “In the very early days of the marriage she was somewhat subordinate, but that pretty quickly changed.”

Even as she forges her own identity, Mr. Murdoch’s influence is never far. “Snow Flower” was released domestically by News Corporation’s Fox Searchlight in July 2011 just as revelations surfaced that The News of the World had hacked into the voice mail of Milly Dowler, the teenager who had been kidnapped and murdered. The film grossed only about $11 million worldwide.

In recent months, as James Murdoch continues to face scrutiny about his involvement in the scandal in Britain, and has resigned several key positions in the Murdoch empire, investors have questioned the future leadership of News Corporation. In only the most hushed and off-the-record conversations do people close to the company ask: could Wendi take over one day?

Doubtful. In contrast to Anna Murdoch, who had an office on News Corporation’s corporate floor and a position on the board until 1998, when Mr. Murdoch forced her off, the third Mrs. Murdoch is kept at a distance.

“I’d say she actively does not want a role in the company,” said Mr. Geffen, a longtime friend. “Nor does she have an ambition to have her kids involved in the company.”

IN recent months, the Murdochs have grown to live largely separate lives, with Mrs. Murdoch taking the girls to piano lessons and attending red-carpet galas, and Mr. Murdoch dealing with the scandal unfolding in Britain. As Mrs. Murdoch attended the Oscars in February, Mr. Murdoch traveled to London to visit the newsroom of the embattled Sun tabloid, which has been accused of widespread bribery to a network of corrupt officials.

He rarely accompanies her to the many charitable events and parties she attends, partly because he is 81 and partly to avoid the news media, said several people close to the couple who did not want to discuss their marital relations for attribution. (This weekend, the couple are vacationing in Venice, after attending News Corporation meetings in Rome and Milan.)

It has not been entirely easy for Mrs. Murdoch to feel comfortable around the kind of company she now keeps. “I’ve seen her evolve over time in terms of her capacity to handle meeting people in the industry and senior government officials,” said Ms. Shan, her graduate school roommate. “Initially that wasn’t her comfort zone.”

Mrs. Murdoch still regularly (and humorously) drops references to how far she has come since her meager childhood in China.

Like last year when she and Ms. Huffington hosted a party at Ms. Huffington’s Manhattan apartment to celebrate Mrs. Freston’s newest weight-loss book, “The Lean.” Guests included Martha Stewart, Joel Klein and Harvey Weinstein. Because Mrs. Freston is a vegan, the caterers had assembled a meatless spread with tofu, quinoa and kale spun into elaborate hors d’oeuvres.

Ms. Huffington recalled a toast Mrs. Murdoch gave. “She said, ‘I grew up so poor in China that one day I aspired to have meat regularly,’ ” Mrs. Huffington said. “ ‘Now that I can have meat three times a day, Kathy tells us we can’t have any meat at all.’ ”