Dolkun Tunurganjan, 31, a Uighur from the western Chinese region of Xinjiang, is on a mission to promote ethnic harmony.

For a year now, the former kebab vendor has been traveling across China — first by bicycle and now by motorcycle — equipped with a stereo blasting Uighur music and a banner bearing the words: “The Xinjiang people live in harmony with people of all ethnic groups.”

Mr. Tunurganjan’s mission is timelier than ever, given rising ethnic tensions following several deadly attacks in recent months that the authorities have attributed to Uighurs, the mostly Muslim, Turkic-speaking people native to Xinjiang. But for this same reason, his journey has not been without obstacles.

“I was often rejected by hotels or restaurants,” Mr. Tunurganjan told the state-run Global Times in a report published on Friday. “Some even said ‘Xinjiangers are no good’ to my face. That was very hurtful.”

Discrimination against Uighurs is not new. Even in Xinjiang, Uighurs are often passed over for jobs and government positions in favor of ethnic Han, the dominant group in China.

But hostility toward Uighurs has become more marked in recent months given the string of attacks that officials have attributed to “terrorists” from Xinjiang, including a car crash and explosion near Tiananmen Square last October, a stabbing rampage at the Kunming Railway Station in the southwestern province of Yunnan in March and, most recently, a bombing at a railway station in Urumqi, the capital of Xinjiang, in April.

The Kunming attack in particular, said Mr. Tunurganjan, was especially damaging for his venture. He learned of the knifings while watching television at a street-side shop, he said, and the shop owner walked over to him and said, “Look — this is the work of you Xinjiang people,” according to a report in Southern Weekly.

Even with an official letter of introduction from government officials in his home county of Yining and seals of endorsement from local Communist Youth League offices, since the Kunming attack, more and more hotels and stores have refused to serve him, and people have increasingly turned away or ignored him when he asked for directions, Mr. Tunurganjan, who is unable to read the Chinese characters on road signs or maps, told Southern Weekly. One night in the southern region of Guangxi, he had no choice but to sleep outside next to his motorcycle, having been turned down by 18 hotels.

“There wouldn’t have been so many difficulties if not for the incidents,” referring to the Kunming and Urumqi attacks, he told Global Times.

Despite this, Mr. Tunurganjan says he has no plans to give up his journey across China. The project to promote ethnic harmony was originally conceived as a form of rehabilitation after serving seven years in prison for a drunken rape, he told Global Times, and he wants to see it through. Since he set out in May last year, he has traveled across eight provinces or regions, including Tibet, Yunnan, Sichuan and Guangdong, according to Global Times.

Along the way, Mr. Tunurganjan has been meeting all kinds of people and has tried to explain to them that “most Uighurs are good” and “we are one family,” Global Times said.

He is particularly pleased by one incident that occurred this year while he was traveling in Guizhou Province, when he helped mediate a dispute involving a Han Chinese who had stabbed a Uighur after he found out that the phone the Uighur had sold to him was fake. After two days of arbitration, he was able to persuade the Uighur family to accept the offered amount for compensation from the Han man. To show their gratitude, the local police donated 5,000 renminbi to Mr. Tunurganjan to support his journey, according to Southern Weekly.

Some Uighurs, however, have apparently taken issue with Mr. Tunurganjan’s cross-country good-will tour, seeing it more as a case of collaborating with oft-resented officialdom. After his cellphone number was posted online, Global Times reported, he received several calls from strangers speaking in Uighur, some threatening to kill him and others offering to pay him to stop.

“Some hatred grows from illegal and biased law enforcement,” Mr. Tunurganjan said, adding that several Uighurs had complained to him that the police would sometimes detain and beat Uighurs for no reason. “There should be more official publicity of national unity and strict regulations on law enforcement.”