BEIJING — The Stars and Stripes at half-staff at the United States Embassy in Beijing on Monday was not the only sign here of the death ofAntonin Scalia, the American Supreme Court justice.

China venerates the idea of benevolent justice, as widespread admiration for the legendary Song dynasty Judge Bao shows, but it lacks an independent and impartial system of justice. Powerful Communist Party committees typically instruct judges how to rule in sensitive cases. Only 0.07 percent of court cases in 2013 ended in acquittal.

Those factors may help explain the large online reaction among legal professionals in China to Justice Scalia’s death over the weekend. By Monday morning, several essays were circulating in Chinese. One, a lengthy, 12,000-character paean written by He Fan, a justice on China’s Supreme People’s Court, and posted to his Weixin account, funnylaw1978, had been read more than 66,000 times and drew many comments.

Justice He, an expert on the United States Supreme Court who has written and translated several books about the American justice system, called Justice Scalia “maverick and brilliant” and a “judicial genius.”

“Whether you love him or hate him, everyone must admit that Antonin Scalia was the most influential contemporary American justice,” Justice He wrote.

“Mount Tai has collapsed, the pillars have broken, a wise man has withered,” a user identified as MYZ wrote, in a comment “liked” more than 100 times.

Mount Tai, in the eastern province of Shandong, represents longevity in Chinese tradition. The three phrases express mourning for a widely respected person.

The rest of MYZ’s message struck an alarmist, Donald Trumpish note, citing the wave of Muslim migrants sweeping into Europe and wondering whether the loss of a conservative bulwark like Justice Scalia could usher in similar threats to social stability in the United States:

“Muslims are storming the European continent. Will the palace of American law also enter a preposterous phase?” MYZ asked.

Other commenters were less dramatic, with many like this:

“Farewell, Scalia!” a person identified as Bajie wrote.

“Go well, excellence among American judges!” wrote another, going by Moshang Yelan.

Some struck a more familiar note, expressing admiration for Justice Scalia’s judgment. He was a man “who liked to banter but thought extremely rigorously, who didn’t allow fliers outside clinics, but allowed flag-burning on squares,” a commenter whose handle is dubilubidu wrote. “His obsession with the interpretation of rules often led him to unwittingly sell out his teammates at the last minute. His lethality far exceeded Kennedy’s,” an apparent reference to fellow Justice Anthony M. Kennedy.

China is undertaking major changes to its legal system aimed at improving the quality of justice. Few expect the outcome to be a truly independent judiciary, however.

A user named Vivi, praising Justice Scalia’s consistency and conservatism, wrote: “In the linguistic context of the daunting and vigorous prairie fire of Chinese legal reform, this legal affairs worker sees things a bit differently after reading this mini-biography of the big foreign judge. This, one could even say, poison-tongued conservative judge, was humorous, but didn’t give up his Catholicism when it came to important questions, opposing abortion and same-sex marriage, and letting people see a truly respected person who stuck to his views.”

Another, named Fengzhizi, wrote: “I hope the people in our legal world continue to work hard to encourage each other.”

And a person called Milo wrote: “It’s a long essay. America is far away. But fairness, justice and openness are not remote,” an apparent reference to shared aspirations.

Not everyone who read or commented on Justice He’s essay was a judge, but it was likely that some were, and that others were lawyers or legal administrators, said Susan Finder, a lawyer based in Hong Kong and author of the Supreme People’s Court Monitor, a legal blog.

“I think people are fascinated by the U.S. Supreme Court because judges have a lot of social prestige in the U.S. If a Supreme Court judge passed away here, that wouldn’t happen in Beijing,” Ms. Finder said in an interview, referring to the respect shown to Justice Scalia that included a presidential proclamation to lower flags to half-staff at government buildings in the United States and at military installations and American embassies worldwide.

Another reason for the Chinese attention to a faraway event may be a desire to be taken seriously in the global legal community, despite the restricted nature of their work at home, Ms. Finder said.

“The Communist Party leads them by the nose,” she said. Still, “they want to know what’s going on in the rest of the world and to let the rest of the world know that they’re not legal country bumpkins.”

In 2013, there were about 200,000 judges at all levels in China, according to official figures, and probably hundreds on the Supreme People’s Court, compared with nine justices on the United States Supreme Court.

One reason for the large number of justices on China’s top court, Ms. Finder said, is the range of issues they are expected to rule on, including the many death sentences that must be reviewed by the Supreme People’s Court, frequent legal interpretations and dealing with petitioners who cannot find justice locally. “It’s a big bureaucracy,” she said.