Just before she found her dream fixer-upper in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, Antoinette Sneed left an open house in tears. Raised in an Italian-American family in Williamsburg, she had all but given up on finding an affordable place in Brooklyn.

“We went to one open house with 100 people there,” she said. “You had to wait in line to walk up the steps.”

Ms. Sneed, a speech and language pathologist for a public elementary school in Bushwick, was convinced that she and her husband, Jason Sneed, would have to leave the borough entirely, but Mr. Sneed kept looking. One day he came across a listing on Craigslist for a two-family townhouse in Greenpoint, just 10 minutes from where Ms. Sneed’s parents lived in Williamsburg.

It was a 2,400-square-foot wood-frame townhouse with red vinyl siding on the facade, a style typical of this once-industrial waterfront community. The house, on North Henry Street, had a backyard, stained glass, pine floors and a beautiful staircase. It also had water damage, swan wallpaper and eight resident cats.

“The main floor felt like it had never been touched,” Ms. Sneed said. “Right away I could picture my dream house.”

The Sneeds made an offer the day after they saw it, in late 2011, and later bought the house for $761,000. Neither had any experience renovating a home, but they were unfazed. They changed the layout, but kept the rental apartment and many of the original details.

The area, traditionally Polish, still retains that flavor. Polish is spoken by customers at traditional bakeries like Cafe Riviera, butchers and pharmacies on Manhattan Avenue, the main commercial strip. Although destination restaurants have arrived in recent years, newer residents still line up for kielbasa or pierogies at Lomzynianka and Karczma Polish Restaurant before a night out.

The stylish bars and restaurants clustered around the Nassau Avenue subway station and near the rapidly developing waterfront, including the minimalist craft-beer hall Torst and the industrial-chic restaurant Glasserie, are a particular draw for younger residents and visitors.

“Everyone thinks Greenpoint is like a little European town — it has that vibe,” said Victor Wolski, a broker at Greenpoint Properties who grew up in the area. “There are a lot of people from overseas who buy in the neighborhood. German, French and Polish families are still buying in the neighborhood.”

Greenpoint’s transit shortcomings — it is served by the G train, the only nonshuttle that does not enter Manhattan — no longer seem to deter new residents from moving here, although many still grumble about them. This summer, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority halted G train service between Brooklyn and Queens for about five weeks for repairs.

Earlier this year the crowdfunding platform Kickstarter moved into a brick building on Kent Street that once belonged to the Eberhard Faber Pencil Company. Several other large residential and mixed-use developments are planned for the waterfront. A major development, called Greenpoint Landing, will add 5,500 units of affordable and market-rate housing on 22 acres of waterfront over the next decade.

What You’ll Find

The neighborhood, with a population of around 35,000 in the 2010 census, is bounded roughly by the East River, Newtown Creek, the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway and McCarren Park, which it shares with Williamsburg.

Two- and three-family wood-frame townhouses, often with colorful vinyl facades, make up about 75 percent of housing stock, said Rich Awn, an agent at Miron Properties who lives in Greenpoint. There are a smattering of brick townhouses and brownstones, mostly in the historic district that runs roughly from Kent Street to Calyer Street, between Franklin Street and Manhattan Avenue. Greenpoint also has prewar tenement buildings, most originally configured into one-and-a-half-bedroom railroad apartments, but some have been renovated into two- or three-bedrooms, Mr. Wolski said.

After the waterfront area rezoning in 2005, many luxury condos and rental buildings were built. Some disused factories were also turned into condos and rentals.

The recession temporarily halted condo development in Greenpoint, but it has since rebounded. Last year, Mike Marotti, a 29-year-old information technology manager, and his fiancée, Jess Bergeron, moved into an 800-square-foot duplex one-bedroom condo with a backyard on Norman Avenue that Mr. Marotti’s father bought as an investment for about $661,000. “It had been built in 2008,” Mr. Marotti said. “They had a hard time selling, and then rented for a few years and then put it back on the market.”

What You’ll Pay

Julia Segal, a broker at Miron Properties, said two- to three-family townhouses typically go from $1.3 million to $2 million, “depending on the condition,” up from around $750,000 to $850,000 in 2012. There are few single-families, she said, and they generally cost around $1 million. At the low end, buyers should be prepared to renovate, according to Mr. Wolski, of Greenpoint Properties.

An analysis by aptsandlofts.com of 23 newly built one-bedroom condos sold this year showed an average price of about $632,000. New and prewar two-bedrooms, mostly over 1,000 square feet, have been selling at an average price of about $932,000, an analysis of 21 properties showed. “What a two-bedroom cost in 2009, is now what a one-bedroom costs,” Mr. Awn said. There are few co-op units.

One-bedrooms typically rent for around $1,700 to $2,200 a month in prewar buildings, Ms. Segal said, and $2,500 to $3,500 in luxury and new buildings. Prewar two-bedrooms go for around $2,700, she said; in newer buildings, the range is $3,800 to $4,400.

What to Do

Green spaces include WNYC Transmitter Park, which opened on the waterfront two years ago, and the nine-acre McGolrick Park, which has a Sunday farmer’s market. Straddling Greenpoint and Williamsburg, the 35-acre McCarren Park, with its outdoor pool and recreation center, is known for summer films and concerts and a Saturday greenmarket.

Traditional Polish restaurants and bakeries are concentrated around Manhattan and Nassau Avenues. Newer restaurants like Luksus, behind the Torst beer bar and serving a Scandinavian-influenced tasting menu, and longtime favorites like Peter Pan Donut and Pastry Shop draw crowds from outside the neighborhood. Watering holes include the Manhattan Inn, a piano bar and restaurant, and No Name Bar, which has DJs and a back garden.

The Schools

Greenpoint has three public elementary schools. Public School 31, on Meserole Avenue, received an A on its most recent city progress report. P.S. 34, on Norman Avenue, scored a B, and P.S. 110, on Monitor Street, received a C. Middle School 126, on Leonard Street, scored an A on its most recent city progress report.