WASHINGTON — President Obama, shaking off an electoral drubbing that cost his party its Senate majority, said on Wednesday that he was eager to work with Republicans to find common ground during the final two years of his presidency, even as he promised to go through with unilateral action on immigration over strong Republican objections.

“The American people overwhelmingly believe that this town doesn’t work well,” Mr. Obama said in a news conference in the ornate East Room of the White House, in which he declined to “read the tea leaves” of the election or say whether he deserved blame for its outcome. “As president, they rightly hold me accountable to make it work better.”

That was as close as Mr. Obama came to accepting responsibility for the punishing results on Tuesday during an exchange with reporters in which he was relentlessly upbeat.

“It doesn’t make me mopey, it energizes me,” Mr. Obama said. As if to underline his forward-looking approach, he opened the session by calling for immediate action by Congress on a request for emergency funding to combat Ebola and a measure to authorize military action against the terrorist group calling itself the Islamic State.

The president also said he was willing to compromise with Republicans on trade, corporate tax reform and infrastructure spending, and promised to reach out to the leaders of the rival party.

“If the ways that we’re approaching the Republicans in Congress isn’t working, you know, I’m going to try different things, whether it’s having a drink with Mitch McConnell or letting John Boehner beat me again at golf,” the president said with a laugh.

But minutes after Mr. McConnell said in his own news conference that executive action on immigration this year would poison the well for bipartisan cooperation during the remainder of Mr. Obama’s term, the president vowed that he would not back down from his promise to act on his own to overhaul the immigration system.

“What I’m not going to do is just wait,” he said, adding that “the American people sent a message — one that they’ve sent for several elections now. They expect the people they elect to work as hard as they do.”

In his own news conference in Louisville, Ky., Senator Mitch McConnell, who is likely to lead the new Republican majority in the Senate next year, vowed a spirit of cooperation and compromise with Mr. Obama even as he cautioned that a more starkly divided government in Washington would inevitably lead to sharp partisan disagreements.

“When the American people choose divided government, I don’t think it means they don’t want us to do anything,” Mr. McConnell told reporters in his first news conference since his party trounced Democrats in Tuesday’s elections. “We ought to start with the view that maybe there are some things we can agree on to make progress for the country.”

Mr. McConnell largely sidestepped the most divisive issues that are likely to create conflict between his members and Mr. Obama. And he played down ideological differences among his own members that might disrupt any efforts to compromise with the president.

But he promised to make the Senate “work again” by changing the rules in the chamber. And he flatly promised that Congress would not shut down the government or default on the national debt in disputes about the nation’s finances.

The Republican leader said Mr. Obama called him on Wednesday and discussed issues that might form the basis of a common agenda, including work on trade deals that Republican lawmakers strongly support. He described his relationship with Mr. Obama as “cordial” in the past several years.

“There’s not a personality problem here or anything like that,” Mr. McConnell said.

But Mr. McConnell also acknowledged that there would be issues that divide the parties and he signaled that some of those were likely to generate the kind of tension in Washington that voters despise.

“We will certainly be voting on things as well that we think the administration is not fond of,” he said.

The full magnitude of the Republican Party’s success in reshaping the national political landscape at Mr. Obama’s expense became clearer Wednesday as the party seemed headed toward an even longer list of electoral victories in Senate and governor races that had been too close to call.

In Alaska, the winner of the Senate race remained uncertain Wednesday, though the Republican candidate, Dan Sullivan, moved into a small lead in the vote count and appeared poised to oust Senator Mark Begich, a Democrat. A victory by Mr. Sullivan would further whittle away Mr. Obama’s support in a Senate that has for years served as the president’s bulwark in Congress against the Republican-controlled House.

If Mr. Sullivan wins and Republicans succeed in ousting Senator Mary L. Landrieu in Louisiana in a runoff election next month, Republicans would command a 54-vote majority in the Senate, a gain of nine seats and an almost complete turnaround from the current chamber, where Democrats control 55 seats.

In Virginia, Senator Mark Warner, a Democrat, was slightly ahead in the vote count in his bid for re-election, but his Republican challenger, Ed Gillespie, a former lobbyist and Republican political adviser, was within less than a percentage point and could request a recount in that state.

Republican candidates for governor in Maryland, Maine and Massachusetts also claimed victories over Democratic opponents in states that by all accounts should have been bright spots for the president and his allies in an otherwise dismal election season.

In Colorado, Gov. John W. Hickenlooper, a Democrat, narrowly clinched a second term early Wednesday morning, fending off an unexpectedly tough challenge from a Republican congressman who accused the governor of yanking Colorado too far left on gun control, energy and taxes.

In Connecticut, a bitter race for governor ended Wednesday when Thomas C. Foley, the Republican challenger, conceded in an email to supporters, handing victory to the incumbent, Dannel P. Malloy.

“Governors get things done. That’s what the country wants,” Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey, chairman of the Republican Governors Association, said on the “Today” show on NBC on Wednesday. Mr. Christie dodged questions about his own presidential ambitions, saying that “today is a day to celebrate what my fellow governors have done.”

By Wednesday afternoon, it appeared that Republicans were on the verge of picking up 15 additional seats and possibly a few more — gains that would give them their largest majority since the World War II era.

The Democratic losses were even larger than top White House aides had feared they might be, and appeared likely to require a rethinking by the president of how he governs during the final two years of a second term that has already been marked by discord and gridlock with the Republican Party.

The results are an immediate blow to the administration’s hopes to further broaden the president’s health care law by expanding Medicaid in additional states. Some of those states will now be controlled by Republican governors who are unlikely to agree to an expansion of the health care law.

White House aides are bracing for calls from both parties for Mr. Obama to cancel or postpone plans to announce executive actions that would reshape the nation’s immigration laws and provide the legal authority for millions of undocumented immigrants to stay in the country. Mr. Obama promised to unveil his plans soon after the congressional elections, and aides signaled that he was unlikely to back down from that promise.