William Ward sells a lot of gum. He works at a newspaper stand just around the corner from a bizarre attraction called the gum wall near Pike Place Market just off the waterfront here, and people show up unprepared. He also sells a lot of hand sanitizer.

“I tell people it’s the second-most disgusting tourist attraction in the world,” Mr. Ward, 31, said. In his view, only the Blarney stone in Ireland, which millions of tourists actually kiss, can top the gum wall on the gross-out scale.

But gum, in a dozen or so varieties — helped by the sign out front, “We sell gum!” — still flies off the shelves. In most cases, he said, the gum is destined for only the briefest of chews before commemoration or deposit or whatever it is that people do, usually with a photo, in making the wall one of this city’s strangest destinations.

Now, the gum is coming down, after accumulating for 20 years in a deeply encrusted pointillist display of perhaps a million pieces — and about 2,200 pounds of sugary, cavity-inducing weight that Pike Place officials say threatens the integrity of the 115-year-old brick wall. Crews on Tuesday morning started to remove the gum with garden rakes and superheated water, 260 degrees Fahrenheit, in a three-day display of industrial-strength dental hygiene.

In the days before the cleaning, there was a rush of last-minute visits and gum-themed selfies. People like the Fergus family, visiting from Phoenix this week, even stopped at Costco before leaving home to load up on supplies for a visit.

“Five packs, 15 sticks in each,” Christie Fergus said. She and her husband, Brian, and their two children, Michael, 8, and Rachel, 3, chewed their way through the arsenal at a stop at the wall on Monday afternoon, then spelled the family’s name in large bright green spearmint.

“It was pretty disgusting, but also a really interesting and fun family activity,” said Ms. Fergus, a pharmacist. Michael, she said, gets credit for the family name idea.

Pike Place Market officials initially tried to protect the wall from gum after it began appearing there in the 1990s, added by people waiting to enter an improvisational comedy club. But after several cleanings, and the realization that mentions of the wall in tourist guidebooks like Frommer’s were spurring people on, they surrendered. A spokeswoman for the market, Emily Crawford, said she expected people would resume the practice the moment the wall was once again blank.

“It’s a crowdsourced piece of public art,” Ms. Crawford said. “We don’t need to promote it.”

Chris Borgen, 31, a firefighter from a Seattle suburb who had never visited before, said he was prompted to come by his mother, who told him about the cleaning. He was there on Monday, holding up his son, Abbott, who is almost 2, for photos.

Mr. Borgen said he imagined coming back for a kind of time-lapse series as the gum gradually comes back and Abbott grows up.

Donna Prust, a retired technology worker, was taking photos on Monday of Ed the Clam, a smiley-faced clamshell character that has become a kind of “Kilroy was here” figure for many people, who post pictures of him on his Facebook page. Ms. Prust, 68, who has taken photos of herself and the clam in various places around the world, pressed the figure into the gum, which was several inches thick in spots, then pasted on a blue bubble as though Ed was chewing bubble gum.

“Hand sanitizer!” she said, rifling through her purse when the task was done.

Thanks to the scale of their gum deposit, and perhaps the gross-out factor as well, Ms. Fergus said the family’s visit to the wall had just about exhausted their desire for gum.

“I think we will take a break from chewing gum for a while after that,” she said in a telephone interview as they prepared to head home.