WELLINGTON, New Zealand — This week, as New Zealanders worried about rising tensions with China, a Chinese state newspaper published an opinion piece by a former prime minister of New Zealand, apparently hailing China’s achievements. “We need to learn to listen to China,” the headline read.

There was one problem with the article: Jenny Shipley, the former leader named in the byline, was not its author.

The publication on Monday of the op-ed piece in People’s Daily, an official government newspaper, makes Mrs. Shipley the latest prominent foreigner to have been presented in the Chinese state media as being supportive of the party’s policies at a time that suits Beijing’s purposes. This and other examples of foreign scholars and journalists depicted as offering glowing praise about China are part of a propaganda effort in recent years to lend credibility to the party’s talking points.

In the op-ed attributed to Mrs. Shipley, she appeared to hail China’s progress on the education, employment and development of women and on reducing poverty. It also said that China’s Belt and Road Initiative — a major geopolitical campaign by President Xi Jinping to link Asia with more bridges, trains and ports — was “one of the greatest ideas we’ve ever heard globally.”

Mrs. Shipley did not respond to a request for comment. She told The New Zealand Herald that she had made the comments in a December interview with People’s Daily but had not written an opinion piece as it was presented on the newspaper’s website. She told CNN that the quotes attributed to her were correct.

But unlike some others who have suffered the same fate, Mrs. Shipley did not immediately disown the substance of her remarks.

On the People’s Daily’s website, a sentence saying that Mrs. Shipley made the remarks during an interview in December was added to the bottom of the article this week after it ran, but her byline remains on it.

The publication did not respond to a request for comment.

Several other scholars and writers have had experiences similar to Mrs. Shipley’s. Rory Medcalf, an Australian expert on China and head of the National Security College at the Australian National University in Canberra, no longer gives interviews to Chinese news media outlets after an op-ed he had not written appeared under his name in China’s Global Times newspaper in 2012.

He said that, as was the case with Mrs. Shipley, he had given an interview that was published as an opinion piece. He added, however, that crucial details of what he said had also been changed.

“The Chinese state media are at great pains to point out to the Chinese people that foreigners actually are generally positive about the direction China is taking,” Professor Medcalf said. “Of course that isn’t exactly the case.”

“It’s about co-opting foreign voices to give credibility to everything that the leadership in China is doing,” he said. Mrs. Shipley’s name, he added, would carry weight in China because of her former role.

For precisely that reason, Mrs. Shipley has drawn flak for the op-ed since it came out.

Winston Peters, New Zealand’s foreign minister, said the timing of the piece was “very unwise.” He added, in remarks to reporters, that Mrs. Shipley “needs to explain those words.”

Mrs. Shipley told The Herald she would “never think of getting into a public situation like this at such an important time for New Zealand’s relationship.”

Concerns have been growing in New Zealand that the country might become the latest target of Beijing’s scorn after it blocked Huawei, a Chinese technology giant, from supplying technology for a mobile data network in November. In doing so, New Zealand joined the United States and Australia in rejecting Huawei equipment.

Worries about the state of bilateral ties grew last week after the planned opening of a New Zealand-China tourism initiative was canceled and an Air New Zealand flight bound for Shanghai returned to Auckland over an administrative issue. Exporters also said they had begun to have difficulty getting products into China, although New Zealand’s government said it had not substantiated any such claims.

The People’s Daily op-ed with Mrs. Shipley’s byline ran the same day that New Zealand’s current prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, was forced to deny that the country’s relationship with China was deteriorating.

“China is a very important and highly valued partner for New Zealand,” Ms. Ardern said in a statement to reporters on Monday.

Anne-Marie Brady, a scholar of China at the University of Canterbury in Christchurch, New Zealand, who has written on what she calls China’s network of influence in New Zealand, said in an email that it was “quite extraordinary” to see the Communist Party’s main newspaper create an op-ed using someone’s byline without their permission.

“This is especially so when that person is the former prime minister” of New Zealand, and when relations between the countries are so tense, she wrote.

The incident may lead to further scrutiny of Mrs. Shipley’s ties to China.

After serving as prime minister of New Zealand from 1997 to 1999, Mrs. Shipley took on roles as chairwoman of the China Construction Bank NZ and Oravida NZ, a food export company that serves the Chinese market. She was pictured in the Chinese news media, along with other former world leaders, attending a December forum hosted by Mr. Xi, China’s president — around the time she said she had given the interview.