Cobbled lanes, broad avenues, streets for gallery-hoppers, food-lovers, shoppers and flâneurs: Contributors in 6 cities describe the byways they love; and readers share their favorite walks on Facebook.

BERLIN

Rüdesheimer Strasse

By JOSHUA HAMMER

Nobody would call Wilmersdorf one of Berlin’s hipper districts. The area suffers from a shortage of lively cafes and restaurants, and has earned a reputation for being profoundly bürgerlich — a slightly derisive term connoting affluent respectability. But this sprawling residential quarter in western Berlin does have one major asset: a number of attractive streets and squares, classic jewels of Mitteleuropa, that were left largely untouched by the Allied bombing at the end of World War II.

Rüdesheimer Strasse, tucked away in one of Wilmersdorf’s quieter corners, is my favorite. This tidy shopping street leads directly to Rüdesheimer Platz, which dates from the reign of Kaiser Wilhelm II, when the German capital was undergoing a rapid westward expansion into farms and woodlands. An urban developer named Georg Haberland raised financing for the project in 1905, and named the square and area after towns in Germany’s wine-producing Rheingau region. To build it, he hired the German architect Paul Jatzow, known for his English country-style aesthetic, who designed tidy rows of three- and four-story earth-toned apartment buildings with manicured front lawns, carved stone porticoes, red-tile roofs, gables and mock half-timbered facades.

The heart of the platz is an intimate park and flower garden, freshly bloomingwith pansies and tulips every April. Overlooking the park is a 1911 fountain and a triumvirate of statues that harkback to German myth: Siegfried, the dragon-slaying hero of the epic poem“The Nibelungenlied”; and the allegorical figures Father Rhine and Mother Mosel, symbols of the main rivers that flow through the country’s southern wine-producing region.

For much of the year, Rüdesheimer Platz is a quiet urban oasis, but that aura of tranquillity vanishes between May and September. That’s when the annual Rheingau wine festival, or Weinbrunnen, moves in. Wine producers from across southern Germany and Austria sell their rieslings and spätburgunders from a wooden hut in the square from the afternoon until late evening. On some weekends there is live music and an outdoor market.

The festival has become one of Wilmersdorf’s most popular events, but it hasn’t pleased everybody. Last year one irate Rüdesheimer Platz resident demanded in a court filing that the festival be drastically shortened, claiming that it was disturbing the peace. Five thousand locals signed a petition to keep the festival in place, which means that the wine is likely to keep flowing for a long time to come.

SAN SEBASTIÁN

Calle 31 de Agosto

By INGRID K. WILLIAMS

When the cool evening breeze whistles down the narrow lanes of San Sebastián’s Parte Vieja, the rumble of storefront grates being raised echoes beneath the wrought-iron balconies and signs emblazoned with the blocky typeface of Basque Country.

The Old Town in Donostia —as every proud Basque will tell you the city is rightly called — is preparing for the nightly txikiteo, the sociable crawl from one pintxo bar to the next.

This gracefully aging belle epoque city on the northern coast of Spain is renowned for its cuisine, the backbone of which is the pintxo. These small snacks arrayed on countertops in bars across the city range from simple anchovy-topped toasts to culinary masterpieces in miniature.

The highest concentration of pintxo bars is in the Parte Vieja, a compact grid of stone-paved pedestrian streets at the foot of Monte Urgull.

Although a txikiteo in the Parte Vieja is rarely confined to a single street, everyone invariably winds up, at some point in the night, on a 200-yard stretch of my favored lane: Calle 31 de Agosto, the only street to survive a devastating fire on that date in 1813.

Traditionalists linger beneath the legs of jamón Ibérico hanging above the wooden bar at La Cepa (No. 7-9), savoring tissue-thin slices of Spain’s superior cured ham.

Or they gather under the awning of Gandarias (No. 23), a locals haunt serving classic pintxos like the skewer of anchovy, olive and guindilla pepper collectively known as the Gilda.

More-contemporary palates are sated at A Fuego Negro (No. 31) with playful pintxos like hot squid-ink “doughnuts” and olives filled with vermouth.

Of the many other pintxo bars on the street, none is better for a final stop than Atari Gastroteka, on the corner with Calle Mayor (No. 18). The expertly mixed gin tonics are why you’re here, though the location facing the beautiful Baroque facade of the Basílica de Santa María del Coro certainly doesn’t hurt.

Carry your bulbous glass out to the church steps and bask in the golden streetlight glow until someone shoos the crowd inside or the hour grows so late that the farewell refrain — “Agur!” —chases you home.

MILAN

Ripa di Porta Ticinese

By INGRID K. WILLIAMS

When the inevitable wave of feeling underdressed crashes down, as it does at regular intervals in Milan, it’s time to seek respite near the ancient Naviglio Grande canal. My fondness for this laid-back area has been tested on many occasions: When the canal is drained of water for restoration works or maintenance, it’s a garbage-strewn eyesore. But by April 26 (just before the start of the World Expo being held here this year), the latest round of renovations is scheduled to be completed, so the shallow canal will again be filled with water from the Ticino River about 30 miles away.

The Naviglio Grande, one of two canals that slice the Navigli neighborhood, was constructed beginning in the 12th century. It was once used for the transportation of goods, but today it’s a hub for aperitivo. This nightly ritual is characteristic of Milan, where a simple predinner drink with something to eat has morphed into a two- or three-hour event accompanied by generous buffets of cured meats, cheeses, focaccia, grissini, pasta, risotto, canapé-like stuzzichini and more. But the food is secondary to the social element, and it’s the Milanese enthusiasm for aperitivo that makes it the happiest of happy hours, as they’re inclined to call it.

In the early evening, friendly greetings begin ringing out along my favored street: Ripa di Porta Ticinese, which runs along the canal’s southern bank. Once a towpath for oxen and horses pulling barges along the canal, the worn cobblestones are now home to a string of bars and cafes where groups of friends gather to make the transition from day to night.

Men in tailored suits arrive by bike. Women in heels clatter across iron pedestrian bridges. Entire classes of university students occupy outdoor tables. And weaving through the diverse crowds are waiters carrying trays of beer, prosecco, vermouth and classic cocktails like the Negroni.

My preferred haunt is Mag Cafè (No.­43), where the bartenders serve creative cocktails alongside endless plates of salumi and cheese. But on this vaguely Venetian stretch, you can’t go wrong by pulling up any sidewalk seat, ordering a spritz and simply enjoying the golden (aperitivo) hour.

ISTANBUL

Itfaiye Caddesi

By SUSANNE FOWLER

In the shadow of the stone arches of the Romans’ monumental Valens Aqueduct, Itfaiye Caddesi is a world away from the bustle of a rapidly changing Istanbul, with its high-rises and traffic jams.

Decades ago, an influx of mainly Kurdish people from southeastern Anatolia set about opening butcher shops, spice shops and cafes here and around a five-block-long, largely pedestrian area in the Fatih district.

It’s not clear why the area is called Kadinlar Pazari (Women’s Bazaar). Some imagine it was the site of a female slave market in Ottoman times. Others say it’s because women do most of the food shopping for Turkish households.

In addition to those shoppers, young people sit on stools underneath the aqueduct’s arches sipping glasses of strong tea. Rows of old men in crocheted skull caps warm the benches across from the peaked windows of the low-slung Husam Bey Tezgahcilar Mosque, and street vendors sell cleaned lamb intestines for making mumbar dolmasi, which are stuffed with cinnamon-spiced ground lamb and rice. Other carts might be loaded with ruby-red pomegranates, walnuts and dried figs.

On one end of the square, near the arches, a shop sells several varieties of honey — pine, chestnut, clover — some of it still in a waxy comb. At the other end, toward the Golden Horn, spice shops display their wares in colorful mounds, with strings of dried eggplant and peppers dangling like semipreciousgems. You can find a half-dozen types of red pepper flakes; hashas, or poppy seeds; allspice; and mahlep powder, made from the seeds of sour cherries.

The square is also a great place for lunch, and office workers crowd into spots offering buryan kebab: chunks of pit-roasted lamb served on a warm disk of thick, quilted pide bread. Add a sprinkling of spices served on the side, including lemony sumac and fragrant dried thyme. Top it off with salty fresh ayran, a foamy yogurt-based drink served with a long-handled spoon.

Then ponder your next move over a metal plate of kunefe, a cheese and sweet syrup dish that’s baked until it is crisp and golden.

VIENNA

Kärntner Strasse, Graben and Kohlmarkt

By ANDREW FERREN

Every time I visit Vienna, I return with at least a dozen photos in my phone nearly identical to ones I’ve taken on other visits.

I love Vienna, especially its arty Sixth and Seventh Districts where galleriesand independent and eco-friendly clothing shops share the sidewalks with cozy cafes and restaurants. But my camera doesn’t lie, and the sites for which I want a lasting visual record are right there along the touristy First District’s main drag running between Hofburg Palace and the Opera House.

Here, on the “Golden U,” as the prime shopping streets of Kärntner Strasse, Graben and Kohlmarkt are known, sit a handful of astonishing edifices that have nothing to do with the splendor of the Austro-Hungarian empire. Rather, they are tiny, quirky boutiques tucked among the palatial facades and renowned emporiums.

Designed by the pioneering Austrian architect Hans Hollein (1934-2014) and dating from the 1960s to the early ’90s, they provide a refreshing antidote to much of the city’s imperial pomp. Despite being beloved by Viennese andthe winner of the 1985 Pritzker, Mr.Hollein is little known outside the city and architectural circles.

The first shop is the Retti Candle Shop dating from 1965 at Kohlmarkt 10, with its sort of die-cut steel facade evoking a stylized candle and its interior completely clad in reflective surfaces like aluminum and mirrors. Nearby at Kohlmarkt 7 and among the most legibly “postmodern” in style is the second shopMr. Hollein created for Schullin Jewelers.

Around the corner at Graben 26 sits his first effort for the same jeweler, known as Schullin I, which sits empty. Built in 1974, it has a facade on which it appears that metals and gems are bubbling out of the stone. Steps away at Graben 31 is Tabaktrafik, a tiny tobacconist beneath a massive bronze tobacco leaf, built in 1992.

While any visitors to the city will likely find themselves on the “Golden U” at some point, Mr. Hollein’s work is definitely worth checking out in person. The architect died last year, just as he was being celebrated with two major exhibitions, including one at the city’s applied arts museum known as the MAK. You can even sleep in one of his buildings (the now-iconic, once-controversial Haas Haus in St. Stephen’s Square), which was conceived as a shopping center in 1987 but now houses the swank Do and Co hotel with stunning views of the first district’s other architectural marvel, St. Stephen’s Cathedral.

PRAGUE

Krymska

By EVAN RAIL

There were certainly prettier Prague streets that could have exploded with newfound cultural allure, but for some reason the big change happened on dirty, crooked little Krymska. A short downhill lane in the relatively run-down residential neighborhood of Vrsovice a mile or so southeast from Old Town, Krymska had virtually nothing of interest when the city’s favorite English-language bookstore, Shakespeare and Sons, closed its original location there in 2010, focusing on its other branches in central Prague and in Berlin. But when the very cool Café v Lese at No. 12 opened in the same spot a few months later, a new era began.

Since then, a handful of galleries, cafes, bars and the like have opened along Krymska’s curtailed length — many just within thelast year or so. At the very top, the three-year-old Plevel restaurant (Krymska 2) offers well-regarded vegetarian and raw food, both relative rarities in pork-powered Prague. Near the bottom of the hill, the artistic salon and exhibition space The Solution, at No. 27, displays the work of at least one local artist and one international artist each month.

Many of the best new destinations have appeared on the street’s final stretch, just after Krymska doglegs around the corner to head south. Last June, the cool new cafe Zenit (Krymska 24) opened in this final section, serving snacks and drinks in a literary (meaning “ruin-like”) atmosphere. A few doors down, the four-month-old InCider Bar, No. 26, specializes in local versions of hard apple cider, a new trend in the beer-loving Czech Republic. And just on the other side, Strojovna, No. 24, offers clothing repair as well as sewing, knitting and crocheting workshops.

The changes extend beyond the short, 400-yard stretch of Krymska itself, with neighboring streets gaining attractions like Café Sladkovsky (Sevastopolska 17) one of the city’s smartest new coffeehouses. In a way, it’s hard to push for Krymska and Vrsovice as a tourist attraction: The streets are still run-down, uneven and scarred with graffiti, and unlike prettier parts of Prague, there are no major monuments, bridges or castles. But you can easily decide for yourself: A 15-minute ride on the 22 tram from the Narodni Trida station in central Prague will take you straight to the Krymska tram stop.