Sign up for NYT Chinese-language Morning Briefing.

XIAOXIHE, China— Every year, the message is the same: the government will fix China’s left-behind countryside through a raft of reforms. This year was no different, with measures meant to help farmers move to cities, educate their children, and invest in improving their land.

But every year, the gap between village and city remains stubbornly wide. Many blame this on the fact that farmers are not allowed to own land, a policy that goes back to one of the founding decisions of the Communist revolution.

In Xiaoxihe, a rolling eastern Chinese region of rice paddies and fishponds, farmers speak of land ownership as something so improbable that it defies imagination.

Dai Jialiang, a 69-year-old farmer, grows rice and vegetables on a small plot of land his family leases from the government. That means that Dai’s family has made a modest living off toiling the land but their gains are limited.

“Ownership is not possible in China,” Mr. Dai said. “Socialism doesn’t allow that.”

When the People’s Republic was established 70 years ago, leaders promised to transform farmers’ lives. And at first they did so, mainly by redistributing land from rich to poor farmers.

Within a few years, however, land was nationalized and, despite efforts in recent decades to mimic a property market, every piece of land in China remains in state hands.

It is in the countryside that problems with the policy are felt most keenly. This issue has become particularly important as the government tries to prop up an economy that last year saw its slowest growth in 28 years. Rural China is still where nearly half of the country’s 1.4 billion people live and is often seen as a much-needed engine for potential growth.

China’s leader, Xi Jinping, has repeatedly underlined the importance of fixing problems in rural areas. In a speech earlier this year, he said, “if the countryside flourishes, the country flourishes. But if the countryside wanes, the country wanes.”

The Xiaoxihe region was once at the center of a daring experiment that helped turn around the country’s flailing fortunes.

Forty years ago, farmers on the verge of starvation decided to ignore rules that required them to work in state-controlled agricultural collectives. Instead, they revived family farms and tilled their land as they saw fit. The result was a boom in agricultural production, setting off a series of capitalist-style overhauls that remade China into one of the world’s fastest-growing economies.

But those reforms failed to reverse earlier policies that had nationalized ownership of land.

That has several concrete implications. Lack of ownership means farmers cannot buy, sell or rent plots to create economically viable larger tracts, or use the land as collateral for loans, limiting their ability to raise capital. And while they can leave the land to work in cities, their lack of property rights means they cannot use the land help finance their new lives.

The result has been widespread stagnation. In 2018, urban incomes were nearly three times higher than those of rural residents, roughly the same gap as in 1978 when economic reforms began.

To be sure, the government recognizes the problem. Every January for the past four decades, the government makes the first document that it issues a new rural policy. In recent years it has come up with changes meant to create a virtual property market — but without actually granting property rights.

“Land ownership is one of these tough issues that they still haven’t addressed,” said Jean Oi, a professor at Stanford University in California who is the co-author of an upcoming book on China’s future challenges. “The question is when, or if, they’ll tackle it.”

Given how the country’s founding myths have been constructed, the answer seems to be never.

The party has long argued that one of traditional China’s main problems was that land was concentrated in the hands of landlords. After taking power in 1949 it introduced a violent campaign that killed up to two million farmers labeled “landlords.” State ownership of land became a nonnegotiable policy and farmers had to work in state-run collectives.

What farmers in this area came up with in the late 1970s was a plan to break the collectives back into the old family plots of land. Ownership stayed with the state but farmers were allowed to farm their plots as they saw fit as long as they paid a tax, usually in grain, to the government. Anything else they produced was theirs.

Suddenly motivated, farmers set records in grain production, while opening up orchards, vegetable plots and fishponds. Starvation, always a risk during the Communists’ first 30 years in power, disappeared.

National leaders endorsed this system but made sure that land stayed in the state’s hands. Farmers eventually got 30-year contracts over their land. When that ran out about a decade ago, they were extended another 30 years.

“Having land concentrated in the hands of someone who might resemble a landlord was the ultimate taboo,” said Daniel Kelliher, a University of Minnesota political scientist who studied the 1980s rural overhauls. “The party never wanted to give up its legal claim on the land.”

For the Dai family, who live in the village of Shijiachong, the new policies created a ceiling that they cannot break through. The family of 10 owns a tractor and a car, but still lives in an aging farmhouse built after the first flush of prosperity in the 1980s.

Extra income is only possible when a family member goes to work in the city and sends remittances. One key problem is that the family only has seven acres of land to farm, which Mr. Dai said could be done by one person. Mr. Dai said they would be happy to rent or sell their land but are not allowed to.

About a decade ago, the state began allowing farmers to lease their land-use rights to other farmers or agribusiness firms. That freed up some farmers to live in the city without forfeiting their land-use rights.

This system was meant to resemble a property market. But according to national statistics, only 37 percent of rural land in China has been transferred to other farmers or companies.

One problem is that the government decides who can transfer land. Reforms announced in August scheduled to take effect next year could give farmers the right to vote for land transfers, but the government can still veto transfers.

Even when the government allows transfers to take place, the system does not give the new holders crucial rights that would allow them to take advantage of their larger scale.

One of the biggest farmers in the region is Zhu Chanyue, a 40-year-old who spent 20 years in China’s prosperous coastal region, working her way up from running a roadside barbecue stall to investing in real estate.

In 2017, Ms. Zhu returned home with her husband and daughter to be closer to her family and try her hand at agriculture. Using the land-transfer system, she amassed nearly 500 acres of land, planting watermelons, wheat and rice — but has not been making money.

“There’s no point boasting,” she said in her small prefabricated office next to her farm. “I made a lot of money in real estate but lost it all in agriculture.”

A key problem, she said, is that transferred land can rarely be used as collateral for bank loans because the farmers who agreed to transfer their land can easily break the deals and ask for it back.

A loan, she said, would be useful because the land needs improving. Centuries of small-scale farming have resulted in it being carved up into tiny plots separated by hills, rocky outcrops and vales. To make it suitable for mechanized farming, she would have to invest significantly — but this would only be possible with a bank loan and the security of knowing she would be able to farm it long term.

“If you want to do something large scale you need capital,” Ms. Zhu said, “so basically the work here is still done by hand.”

Instead of agriculture, this region’s prosperity is built on taxpayer-financed tourism. Every day, tour buses disgorge officials on government-organized pilgrimages to visit museums touting the glories of China’s economic reforms.

For an outsider, the message seems confusing.

According to popular accounts of Chinese economic history, the nearby village of Xiaogang is where the household-contract system began in 1978. There, a large museum features dioramas showing how farmers almost starved to death under the Communists until they secretly subverted their policies — the unwitting implication being that only civil disobedience can effect change.

Tour groups then go to another museum built for a local Communist Party official who worked himself to death in 2009 trying to help farmers.

Most tours end on a lavishly designed main street. It is dominated by three restaurants run by the village’s three main families that agreed in 1978 to farm their own land and not for the government collectives.

But all of this is so sensitive that no one will agree to talk about it. Plainclothes police officers followed a visiting New York Times reporter around town then escorted him to the county line, saying the region was off-limits to journalists.