In a city that’s cleaner, leafier and safer than it has been in some time, home buyers are clamoring for private outdoor space, brokers say. But if you’re looking at the lower end of the market — say, at apartments priced around $500,000 or less — is there any hope of finding your own terrace or lawn?

Maybe. If you’re searching on Staten Island, where many of the listings have yards, you’re in luck. But if you have your sights set on one of the other boroughs, finding a home with a little green space may require patience and perseverance.

A search on Aug. 20 on the real estate site StreetEasy in the under-$500,000 category turned up 156 condos and co-ops for sale in Manhattan with outdoor space, out of a total of 373 apartments. But since the site doesn’t specify what sort of outdoor space, it’s hard to tell how many of those patios and gardens are shared with the neighbors. Sites like those of individual brokerages or multiple listing services that allow you to winnow results by checking specific search terms — “deck,” “balcony” or “garden/patio” — were less encouraging. Still, for the tenacious buyer, there are deals (and greenery) to be had.

In Brooklyn: A Tiny Private Park

Take apartment No. 2 at 268 Berkeley Place in Park Slope: This co-op studio has a garden with a Japanese maple, a hydrangea and brick paths edged in hostas. There’s even room for a table and chairs.

“It takes you out of the metropolitan feel of things,” said Joanna Mayfield Marks, a Park Slope resident and the associate broker with Halstead Property who listed the unit for $435,000. Prospect Park can sometimes feel crowded, she added, and an apartment like this offers “a little peace and tranquillity.”

The catch? At around 500 square feet, the garden is considerably larger than the apartment itself.

Whoever buys the studio, on the ground level of a four-story, eight-unit brownstone near Prospect Park, may need a designer’s eye as well as a green thumb. A large bed will be a tight fit, and the bathroom, tiled in Pepto-Bismol pink, could use an upgrade.

But these may be details you could live with in exchange for a private retreat in the coveted brownstone belt — where single-family townhouses are nowhere near the sub-$500,000 price point and few multifamily buildings currently on the market have terraces. Even new condominiums in this bracket in neighborhoods like Williamsburg rarely seem to offer more than a barely usable Juliet balcony.

Deeper in Brooklyn, where prices are lower, there is a little more green to go around. But often what counts as outdoor space there — in the eyes of brokers, anyway — are lawns separating apartment towers. A recent online search, however, yielded a few single-family houses with yards in Gerritsen Beach, Canarsie and East New York.

In Manhattan: A Terrace of One’s Own

Plenty of penthouses with terraces are available in Manhattan — for a price.

The triplex penthouse at the 72-story CitySpire, at 150 West 56th Street in Midtown, has wraparound terraces on three levels, with a total of 3,000 square feet of outdoor space. It is listed at $100 million.
The terraces in similar apartments at the Plaza Hotel, Trump Park Avenue and 35 North Moore Street in TriBeCa are also stunning and priced nearly as high.

In a borough where the average apartment price was $1.87 million in the second quarter of 2015, according to a report prepared for the Douglas Elliman brokerage, does a buyer who hasn’t won the lottery have any hope of scoring a rooftop terrace?

Maybe. Penthouse D at 103 East 84th Street, a 10-story prewar doorman co-op on the Upper East Side, just off Park Avenue, is listed with Seth Levin, an associate broker at Douglas Elliman, for $225,000. True, it is less than 250 square feet, making the words “Think Big” posted over one of the doors seem like a mantra for peace of mind. And, yes, the monthly maintenance of $1,955 is a bit steep.

But up a couple of steps is a terrace roomy enough to accommodate a small table and chairs. It’s not completely private — it connects with the terrace of the adjoining penthouse — but the apartment’s owners control an almost 15-foot stretch. And for a bit of sun on a Manhattan roof, that may be enough.

In the Bronx: A Balcony with a View

There isn’t much in the way of private outdoor space for less than $500,000 in market-rate buildings in the dense south-central section of the Bronx, according to a search of listings. On the edges of the borough, though, it’s possible to find not only fresh air, but sweeping views.

Many of the tall brick buildings that were constructed there in the latter half of the 20th century have facades studded with balconies. One example is the Edmond Lee, a 17-story co-op at 3135 Johnson Avenue in South Riverdale near the Harlem River, built in the 1950s.

Apartment 16G, a 975-square-foot one-bedroom near the top of the building, is listed by Chintan Trivedi, the owner of Re/Max in the City, for $324,900. Views from its north-facing balcony take in similar high-rises dotting this part of Riverdale, as well as the green hills beyond.

With roughly 30 square feet, the balcony can easily accommodate patio furniture. And the co-op board permits shareholders to enclose their balconies with screens, to keep bugs away, or even with glass walls, to turn them into year-round spaces.

According to brokers, units like this routinely command about 10 percent more than those without balconies. But an even better way to estimate the value that balconies add, they say, is to figure that their square footage is worth up to 50 percent of an apartment’s indoor square footage.

However you figure the value, there are other candidates with the amenity of fresh air in the area. More than half a dozen were offered for under $500,000 on StreetEasy earlier this month, including apartments in the Winston Churchill at 2500 Johnson, at 3601 Johnson and at 735 Kappock Street.

Call it the balcony district. And as Michael Rodriguez, a salesman with Re/Max in the City, said, Riverdale has other things going for it as well. “It’s quieter here,” he said. “And you will get more for your money.”

In Upper Manhattan: A Real Backyard

In the area north of Central Park, where Manhattan tapers to a panhandle, prices tend to be cheaper, but while your dollar may go farther, that doesn’t often mean daisies.

Pricey townhouses in Hamilton Heights often come with private outdoor space, but in most multifamily buildings, roof decks, patios or courtyards are shared. One exception is a co-op at 239 West 148th Street: No. 1F, a two-bedroom duplex with 1,419 square feet that comes with a 300-square-foot yard.

Thirty years ago, yards like these might have been filled with trash, said Willie Kathryn Suggs, the listing agent, who has lived in Harlem since 1985. As Ms. Suggs put it, “You looked at your yard back then; you didn’t use it.” Now, she said, people are embracing the great urban outdoors, from alley gardens to sidewalk cafes.

Because of restrictions imposed on the developer by the city, the annual income of the buyer of No. 1F cannot exceed a percentage of the median income for the area; this year, the ceiling is $185,000, Ms. Suggs said. The co-op, in a prewar 89-unit brick building called the Washington, is priced at $499,999.

“You’re living in a house here,” she said. “This is cheap by New York standards.”

In Queens: A Suburban Oasis

Many of the condominiums built during Long Island City’s ongoing development boom have balconies, but few are being resold for less than $1 million, according to a recent search — perhaps because they are so close to Midtown Manhattan. For a borough known for its suburban vibe, it’s surprisingly difficult to find a home in Queens with a private lawn, at least for less than $500,000.

One charming option, though, is at 111-28 174th Street, in the Addisleigh Park section of St. Albans, a historic African-American enclave with brick and stucco homes. The attached Tudor-style house has three bedrooms, stained-glass windows, a sunken living room and a bonus in back: a petite yard with a grill and a raised deck.

“It’s like an oasis,” said Yvette Watkins, the saleswoman at Douglas Elliman who listed the property for $417,888; it recently went under contract.

Separated from the house by an alley, the yard is still close enough to use for parties. Carolyn Davis, the retired elementary school principal who owns the property, said she has held jazz concerts there. Musicians jammed in the one-car garage under the house, she said, while guests mingled outdoors.

“I would never have bought this house without the yard,” Ms. Davis added. “I come from a large family, and barbecuing is essential.”