Watching a talented writer take a risk is one of the pleasures of devoted reading, and “On Such a Full Sea” provides all that and more. It’s a wonderful addition not only to Chang-rae Lee’s body of work but to the ranks of “serious” writers venturing into the realm of dystopian fantasy. Colson Whitehead, Cormac McCarthy and Margaret Atwood (in her recently concluded MaddAddam trilogy) have all tackled this genre. Doris Lessing’s “Mara and Dann” is a classic, as is Anthony Burgess’s “Clockwork Orange.” Further back in time, one has only to think of Orwell, Huxley and Wells, even Jack London and Mary Shelley. As the author of such carefully realist fiction as “Native Speaker” and “A Gesture Life,” Lee has always been preoccupied by the themes of hope and betrayal, by the tensions that arise in small lives in the midst of great social change. His marvelous new book, which imagines a future after the breakdown of our own society, takes on those concerns with his customary mastery of quiet detail — and a touch of the fantastic.

There are no robots or cannibals in Lee’s future. Instead, “On Such a Full Sea” takes place in an almost familiar world, one whose cities were long ago rendered unlivable by polluted air and water, forcing whole societies to relocate. This time, America’s colonizers come from Asia. “Our people arrived from New China, truly ancient times,” we are told. “There was very little to encounter by way of an indigenous population.”

The novel begins long after New China’s influence has taken hold, creating a tripartite society that, after generations of success, has begun to show its age. To outline it too clearly would ruin the suspense surrounding the discovery of just how this world came to be, but suffice it to say that the upper, middle and lower classes have separated into different realms of existence, a future not impossible for today’s readers to envision.

Fan, the novel’s 16-year-old protagonist — “not beautiful but rather distinctive in her presence” — begins her life in the middle-tier world, as a diver in the untroubled, prosperous labor settlement of ­B-Mor. A conservative, homogeneous place, B-Mor offers an array of simple comforts: “We’re no longer fit for any harsher brand of life.” Daily activity goes according to a strict plan, and even Fan’s older brother’s promotion out of the community leaves no sign of disturbance. Then one day her lover, Reg, disappears — with no explanation, leaving no trace. This unravels poor Fan so swiftly that she does the unthinkable: She leaves the guarded enclave of B-Mor for the wilds of the surrounding “counties,” desperately searching for Reg.

“The funny thing about the tale of Fan,” we are told, “is that much of what happened to her happened to her.” She’s just a teenager, after all; her story is not that of Katniss “catching fire” but simply that of “a girl with a love who was lost,” moving among various strata of society according to the kindness or venality of those who cross her path. The first one to find her, wounded on a county road, is a bearded older man named Quig, who brings her back to the “Smokes,” where his compound provides medical help to the hopeless and the impoverished. Though ramshackle, the world of the “county” is not that of Thunderdome; it’s simply what our own poor, rural areas would become if the government turned its back forever.

We soon learn that Quig is not originally from the counties, and the story of his fall from grace is a devastating reminder of how, in an ungoverned world, the fortunes of even the greatest can hang by a thread. From the counties, Fan eventually finds her way to the highest world — the rarefied realm of the Charters, where she hopes she might be reunited with her brother and Reg — but not before she experiences the savagery of people who have nothing to lose. And Lee isn’t just talking about the impoverished.

Lee’s most interesting choice is his narrator, the collective “we” of the B-Mor community, which changes the novel from an adventure story into a myth in the midst of creation: “The more we follow the turns of her journey, the more we realize that she is not quite the champion we would normally sing; she is not the heroine who wields the great sword. . . . She is one of the ranks, this perfectly ordinary, exquisitely tiny person in whom we will reside, via both living and dreaming.” For there is trouble in B-Mor. This fishing compound, with its regimented social codes, finds itself falling apart after Fan’s departure: The rich Charters are buying fewer fish; the community’s facilities are being defaced with litter and rebellious graffiti; angry crowds are gathering; and a disease known as “C-illness” imperils everyone. For the people of ­B-Mor, Fan’s story becomes a search for a savior: “Within her was the one promise that could deliver us, the seed of all our futures.” And so the people of B-Mor tell her story to themselves, as solace and as explanation. But they aren’t the only ones who see salvation, and profit, in Fan.

The price for this narrative choice is that Lee’s heroine remains a bit of a cipher, and some later sections of the novel suffer from longueurs as a result. But the payoff is a remarkable elasticity, allowing Lee to move from an omniscient bird’s-eye view to an intimate exploration of inner lives to wholly convincing fantasy. The communal voice is particularly riveting when Fan is in danger — “And we can barely recount what was about to happen next . . . ” — adding a creeping horror to the storytelling. It’s proof of Lee’s virtuosity that he can pull off such a feat without allowing his audience to feel anything but narrative drive.

A reader hoping for weird mutants and wild conflagrations has picked up the wrong book; Lee’s influence is more Philip Roth than Philip K. Dick. Although he peppers “On Such a Full Sea” with some genre pleasures — suspiciously friendly (and hungry) strangers; the decadent rich — Fan’s journey through a mysterious future turns out to be a timeless exploration of the human condition. Perfection leads to stagnation, success precludes passion, desperation births cruelty, and within each character we sense desire trying to claw its way out. Yet for all except “ordinary” Fan, there is no way out.

In a scene that could fit easily into his previous novels, Lee sets the members of a love triangle, a woman and two men, in a Charter swimming pool. As the men begin their laps, a wordless battle takes place that ends in blood but not in violence. “All she knew,” we are told, as an onlooker watches the shamed loser, “was that he was staring at her with the deadest eyes.” Scenes like these show where Lee’s interests truly lie. With “On Such a Full Sea,” he has found a new way to explore his old preoccupation: the oft-told tale of the desperate, betraying, lonely human heart.