New Yorkers love to debate about which is better. The Nets or the Knicks? This restaurant or that one? Subways or cabs?

Or, among some residents of Williamsburg, Brooklyn: North or South?

For years, many residents of the northern side of the neighborhood, or above the dividing line of Grand Street, argued that their half was more desirable, mostly because the highly populated neighborhood had a lot more going on.

But those on the southern side, or below Grand Street, would counter that they wouldn’t trade the peace and quiet of their emptier industrial blocks for the world.

Now, however, as the south side ambitiously adds shops, parks and sleek, shimmering apartment buildings — and in the process, begins to resemble its neighbor to the north — any turf battle might be moot. “We’re like how north side was five years ago,” said Jean Chae, who makes organic toys for pets and has been a resident here for seven years. “We’ve changed tremendously, but it’s for the better.”

Ms. Chae moved to a rental in a three-family house in Greenpoint from Manhattan in 2007. But she had to take care of chores like dragging garbage cans to the curb, which, after years of living in full-service buildings, shocked her enough to want to move. She headed for South Williamsburg, and what she found instead was a type of housing that has only grown in popularity since: a new doorman high-rise, courtesy of Schaefer Landing, a condominium complex on the East River that opened about a decade ago.

With hardwood floors and stainless-steel appliances, and an in-unit washer and dryer, the two-bedroom two-bath apartment also offered cinematic views of Manhattan’s skyline. She rented there at first, but then in 2010 was able to buy a different unit in the building for $750,000 in a short sale. Ms. Chae recently put that apartment on the market for $1.38 million; she said its open houses have been busy.

But she’s not going far: She signed a contract to buy a three-bedroom in the same tower, for $1.47 million. In fact, Ms. Chae likes her building — and her evolving neighborhood — so much that she persuaded her parents to trade their Sutton Place co-op for a unit in the same complex.

For decades, South Williamsburg struggled with poverty and crime, said Isaac Abraham, who heads the Federation of Tenants Council of Williamsburg, a housing advocacy group with 5,000 families as members. Today, the demand for affordable units is far outstripping supply, said Mr. Abraham, who for more than 30 years has lived in a two-bedroom rental in Roberto Clemente Plaza, a 1970s Mitchell-Lama complex. He recalls the days of the 1980s, when the neighborhood was tainted by drug dealing, prostitution and burning cars.

Some changes are tough to swallow, like the bike lanes that crisscross the neighborhood, making it too hard to drive. And with thousands more apartments planned — the $1.5 billion Domino Sugar redevelopment on Kent Avenue, by the Williamsburg Bridge, recently received a key go-ahead from the city — car traffic is likely to increase, he said.

“The city needs to do a better job with infrastructure,” he said, adding that increased bus service might help.

What You’ll Find

There is general agreement that Grand Street forms the northern border of the neighborhood and Union Avenue the eastern one, with the East River as the western edge, but the southern edge is in dispute. Longtime residents put the southern border at Flushing Avenue, reflecting a time when the neighborhood was largely populated by Hasidic Jews and Hispanics, groups that still thrive today. But in the last decade or so, brokers and developers have tended to define the neighborhood more narrowly, stopping at Division Avenue, creating a border within which much of the new construction has gone up and where many of the new young residents have moved.

The factories and warehouses that dominated this area for more than a century have often been creatively repurposed, but an industrial flavor remains.

For instance, the Smith Gray building, where men’s wear was manufactured in the early 1900, added condos in the early 2000s. One of South Williamsburg’s first conversion projects, its six-story cast-iron facade still looms prominently at Broadway and Bedford Avenue. Close on its heels was the makeover of the nearby Gretsch, a condo at 60 Broadway, where guitars and other musical instruments were once produced.

About 90 percent of the housing stock is rental, according to census data. Newer rentals include 424 Bedford Avenue, formerly known as Zazza, a 20-story, 66-unit high-rise with market-rate units; and 15 Dunham Place, a 14-story, 160-unit tower with market-rate and affordable apartments.

But ownership opportunities are growing. A huge new project, Oosten, is rising from the full-block site of a former Schaefer beer plant at Wythe Avenue and South Eighth Street. It will deliver 216 condos by 2016.

What You’ll Pay

In a low-inventory market, there aren’t a lot of properties for sale; many are in a handful of buildings.

Just 16 co-ops, condos and townhouses were listed for sale in early April, at an average list price of $1.78 million, according to Streeteasy.com.

At the high end was a combined apartment at the Gretsch, with six bedrooms, six baths and eye-catching stonework, for $6.5 million. At the low end was a two-bedroom condo at Schaefer Landing at $975,000.

In 2009, 61 condos sold, at an average price of $543,716, according to Streeteasy, and in 2013, 122 sold, at an average of $941,183.

For now, the south side still trades at a discount from the north side, by about 15 percent, brokers say — $1,000 a square foot versus nearly $1,200 — but parity is expected in a few years.

Rents, meanwhile, are on the high side in new buildings. One-bedrooms at 424 Bedford, for instance, start at $3,000 a month. South Fourth Street, which opened this year, listed a one-bedroom at $4,200 in early April.

What to Do

Residents are buzzing about Urban Market of Williamsburg, which opened on Broadway and Kent in December; it brings a long-awaited grocery to the area.

Restaurants to make an impression include Motorino, a popular pizzeria, which opened a location at 139 Broadway last year after its original East Williamsburg branch burned. It joins Peter Luger Steakhouse, at 178 Broadway — once the only game around — as well as such standbys as Diner, and Marlow & Sons, at the corner of Berry Street.

Residents can also now kick back on chairs in a newly formed pedestrian plaza on Broadway, which affords views of the Williamsburg Bridge and the dazzling dome of the Williamsburgh Savings Bank.

The Schools

A zoned public elementary option is Public School 84, which focuses on visual arts. It got a C on its recent city report card. Junior High School 050, at 183 South Third Street, is in the neighborhood; it was recently given a B on its report card.

The nearby Brooklyn Latin School, which opened in 2006 and teaches Grades 9 through 12, emphasizes the classics for 500 students; it requires an entrance exam, and shirts and ties are a must. It received a B on its report card. On the 2013 SAT exams, students averaged 584 on the reading section, 604 math and 577 writing, versus 437, 463 and 433 citywide.

The Commute

The elevated J, M and Z trains stop at Marcy Avenue; the J and M at Hewes Street. The financial district can be reached in 15 minutes, though Midtown takes longer. Ferries also run to Manhattan throughout the day from a dock in front of Schaefer Landing.

The History

Before the Williamsburg Bridge was completed in 1903, ushering in the first sustained wave of Manhattan transplants, the area was reached by ferry. A smokestack at Grand Ferry Park was salvaged from a molasses plant where Pfizer Pharmaceuticals, founded nearby in 1849, came up with a way to mass-produce penicillin.