We were near the end of our morning run when Zhang Mei looked up at the imposing escarpment rising to the west of the ancient town of Dali. Ms. Zhang, the founder of WildChina, a boutique travel agency, was visiting her hometown, in a remote and mountainous corner of southwestern China. I knew her from Beijing and happened to be in Dali this week, too, so I somehow allowed myself to be talked into doing a run with her. She was training for her fifth marathon, which she planned to run in Guangdong Province in late November. Our morning run had taken us past farm fields and white-washed village homes and the blue expanse of Erhai Lake, one of China’s largest bodies of fresh water.

But now, as we ran back toward Dali, it was the Cangshan, or Cang Mountains, looming more than 4,000 meters in front of us, that interested her. A layer of white cloud hovered just above the peaks like frosting on a cake. Ms. Zhang said that on Saturday, runners of the Dali 100, an ultramarathon of 100 kilometers, or 62 miles, would pass through the lush heart of the Cangshan. The slopes were thickly forested and carved by steep gullies and waterfalls. Ms. Zhang had gone the previous day to the mountains to check out part of the course and had found the path formidable.

“I hope the runners stay safe,” Ms. Zhang, 42, said. “As a local, I’m scared of the mountains. But outsiders don’t have the same fear.”

The route was not designed for the weak of heart, I learned. After hearing about the Dali 100 that morning, I spoke to the organizer, Yu Lei, an avid endurance runner from the east coast city of Dalian who had been living here in Dali for the past two months, organizing the race. More than 60 runners had signed up to run 100 kilometers and more than 80 to run 50 kilometers, he said. Mr. Yu was very much aware of the culture of risk involved in ultramarathons. Take the famous Marathon des Sables, which covers about 250 kilometers in the Sahara over six days. Three runners have died.

Mr. Yu said his course was no walk in the woods, either. The course went up to 4,092 meters, more than 13,400 feet, above sea level, equal to the heights of some of the highest peaks in the continental United States.

“There is a stretch of 20 kilometers that goes through the middle of the Cangshan,” he said. “It’s very dangerous. If it starts raining, it could get very slippery. There might even be small landslides.”

Long-distance running is increasingly popular in China, and 42-kilometer marathons in the big cities draw many participants. On Oct. 20, more than 30,000 people ran the Beijing Marathon (some urinated on the vermilion walls of the Forbidden City). Ultramarathons, though, are still considered by many Chinese to be the province of the unhealthily obsessed or mentally unstable. One of the better known ones in China is the North Face 100 in Beijing, and that draws only a small fraction of the attention of the Beijing Marathon or Great Wall Marathon.

Mr. Yu is doing his best to widen the appeal. The Dali event is already the second 100-kilometer race he has organized this year. In April, Mr. Yu oversaw the Dalian 100 in his hometown. There were 240 participants, and more than half had registered for the full 100 kilometers, Mr. Yu said. His goal is to organize an ultramarathon in four cities beginning with the sound “Da” — Dalian, Dali, Datong and Daqing.

“I feel as a runner it’s my responsibility to promote this event, and also to teach people that outdoor activities can make them happier and healthier,” said Mr. Yu, 35.

The inspiration came after Mr. Yu completed an ultramarathon in Italy last year. He said he had blisters over his two feet, and six of his toenails had fallen off. But “this event gave me a second life,” he said. “It made me feel like I was reborn, like a phoenix.”

Mr. Yu said that in the run-up to the Dalian race, people “were really skeptical. They asked, ‘How can anybody finish running 100 kilometers?’ But after the event ended, we got really good reviews from all over the country.” Organizers of the Ultra-Trail du Mont Blanc, a well-known 168-kilometer race in the Alps, decided to recognize the events Mr. Yu was organizing and allow runners of those races to earn points toward qualifying for the Mont Blanc run, Mr. Yu said.

Organizing an ultramarathon in China can pose special challenges. In October, Ms. Zhang ran in a 100-kilometer race near Beijing. The route traversed hilly terrain. But even tougher were the attitudes of some of the local farmers — they blocked the runners several times because they did not want the athletes trampling through their land. Ms. Zhang said that, because of those delays, she did not finish. “Some people in China aren’t ready for these kinds of races,” she said.

On Thursday afternoon, I hiked up into the Cangshan to look for stretches of the Dali 100 course. Mr. Yu had said the path would start at the Three Pagodas outside the north gate of the ancient town and go up from there. In the mountains, on a well-paved hiking trail about 2,800 meters above sea level, I came across red sashes tied to pine trees that marked the race route. This was a flat section that followed the contours of gullies. I came across the Zhonghe Temple and began descending the mountain on the steep, dirt hiking trail. The red sashes were still on the trees here. The trail was narrow, and in the rain it would be slippery.

Then I found myself walking through a large cemetery. I realized two things — it was Halloween, and the red sashes had disappeared. The race route had veered off on a different dirt path, away from the hiking trail. I thought Mr. Yu must have diverted the route away from the cemetery so as not to spook the runners. When I came down from the mountain, I called Mr. Yu to ask whether this was indeed the case.

“No, that’s not the reason,” he said. “We just wanted to make the path longer to ensure the race is 100 kilometers. There’s a cemetery on our route, too.”