Manhattan has its squares — Times, Herald, Union, Pershing, Sherman, Verdi and, ever since a blogger christened it, Hell.

Some people who live in a three-by-three-block stretch of the Lower East Side say it is a realm where they are condemned to eternal torture and punishment in this life, not the next one. They blame the neighborhood’s trendiness. They say it caught on as a hangout for people in their 20s and 30s lured by too many bars in too little space.

Hell Square, nine blocks between East Houston and Delancey Streets and Allen and Essex Streets, has about 50 bars and restaurants that serve liquor, and about 35 of them stay open until 4 a.m. Dennis Rosen, the chairman of the New York State Liquor Authority, described it several months ago as “one of the most saturated areas in the city — probably one of the most saturated in the world — in terms of liquor licenses.”

So another application for another liquor license has provoked a strong backlash from Lower East Siders who believe the neighborhood has more than its share of places for thirsty revelers. The latest application has been submitted by a club seeking to occupy 139 Ludlow Street, a five-story building between Stanton and Rivington Streets that has housed a funeral home and a printing company.

In a neighborhood once filled with well-known delis and tenements, the Lower East Side Business Improvement District has crews that sweep the streets after nights of hard partying, clearing away empty bottles and cigarette butts. There are bars with dozens of beers on tap — and bouncers who stamp wrists — and there are neighbors who say things get out of hand.

Sara Romanoski, who lives in the neighborhood and has been involved with the L.E.S. Dwellers, a community group that opposes the Ludlow House liquor license, remembers being awakened in her apartment on Stanton Street one night by the voice of a man in the street. He was screaming a woman’s name — Emilia, Ms. Romanoski said.

“I could hear him as he went off my block onto Ludlow and around and back,” she said. “It went on for 30 minutes. I can’t imagine any other neighborhood where that is tolerated.”

Scott Cooke, who lives at Rivington and Ludlow Streets, said the traffic patterns that have been imposed to cope with the crowds are inconvenient — the police close down Rivington on weekends, he said. Diem Boyd, who founded L.E.S. Dwellers, said the traffic arrangements encourage bars to “take their party into the street,” an opinion Mr. Cooke echoed as he looked back on how the neighborhood had changed in the eight years since he moved in.

“The city thinks it’s acceptable that they shut the street down on weekends,” he said. “It’s like Bourbon Street. There are no cars on Bourbon Street, people just party in the street. They traverse the street from bar to bar. In the French Quarter, they live in buildings on courtyards. Here, you could lean out the window and they could hand you a drink. It’s bar after bar after bar.”

Ludlow House would be a cousin of Soho House New York, a private club in a former warehouse on Ninth Avenue in the meatpacking district, and similar clubs in Hollywood, Miami, London and Berlin that tend to attract the wealthy and the well known. Some of them, including the one on Ninth Avenue, have guest rooms, but according to what its owners have told community leaders, Ludlow House would not.

It does plan, according to the liquor authority, to have bars on the first and second floors and a rooftop terrace off the fourth floor with “a pizza-and-salad-counter terrace.” In all, there would be 41 tables with 152 seats.

A rooftop terrace is a bad idea in a neighborhood with the density of the Lower East Side, Ms. Boyd said. “It’s three feet from people’s windows,” she said.

But a supporter, Tim Laughlin, the executive director of the Lower East Side Business Improvement District, said Ludlow House would be a place where “people could meet with clients, use a laptop, have lunch meetings, all those things that drive daytime foot traffic that permit our restaurateurs and entrepreneurs to have successful businesses during the day.”

The local community board voted against approving the liquor license in May. In August, Ludlow House was the subject of a “500-foot hearing,” a standard proceeding for an application for an establishment within that distance of three or more existing ones. The administrative law judge who presided over the hearing, Raymond Di Luglio, issued a nine-page report that said, among other things, that the rooftop is “within four and five feet of the windows of at least two apartment tenants.” The liquor authority is expected to make a final decision on the license on Tuesday.

Some opponents are concerned that the Ludlow House application is for a club license, which, under liquor authority rules, could be held only by a nonprofit social club. Ms. Boyd questioned whether Ludlow House would have the same structure as, say, a college club with a charter and bylaws, not to mention tax-exempt status. She also said she was concerned that other bar owners would try to reclassify their operations as social clubs to win licenses.

A spokeswoman for Soho House said by e-mail, “It is still too early for us to offer any details surrounding Ludlow Street. However, we are enthusiastic for the project and look forward to hearing from the State Liquor Authority.”

Ms. Boyd said Ludlow House would make Hell Square more hellish. “It will bring another wave of night life in,” she said, adding that it raised the prospect of establishments that would be more like those in the meatpacking district. “More congestion, more traffic, more pollution.”