In an extraordinary public rebuke of Donald Trump's campaign, Mitt Romney and John McCain, the last two Republican presidential nominees, denounced Trump in forceful terms on Thursday and warned that his election could put the United States and even its democratic political system in peril.

Offering himself as a bulwark against Trump's march to the nomination, Romney laid out a precise and lengthy case against Trump, lacerating his business dealings, his erratic pronouncements on national security and demeaning treatment of women, minorities and the disabled.

Romney warned that Trump's nomination would be calamitous for the Republican Party and, quoting John Adams, even suggested it could be suicidal for the country.

Evoking the specter of totalitarianism, Trump, he said, was amplifying a “brand of anger that has led other nations into the abyss.”

“His domestic policies would lead to recession,” Romney said. “His foreign policies would make America and the world less safe. He has neither the temperament nor the judgment to be president.”

Romney's speech cast Trump as an unacceptable candidate under any circumstances, labeling him as “a phony” and “a fraud” who could not be trusted with the nation's highest office.

McCain, once a rival of Romney's, effectively linked arms with him soon after his address, saying that he shared Romney's dismay about Trump's ascent. Alluding to a public letter released on Thursday by dozens of conservative national security leaders, who vowed never to support Trump, McCain echoed their concerns about Trump's “uninformed and indeed dangerous statements on national security issues.”

The onslaught against Trump appeared aimed at sowing new doubts among voters about a man who has taken firm command of the Republican presidential race, and stiffening the resolve of mainstream Republicans to reject Trump.

Gov. Chris Christie, in New Jersey, defended Trump and his own decision to support him. He said he had no problem with Romney's condemnation of Trump, but that the Republican Party should not meddle in the primary election process.

“Democracy is in action,” Christie said. “It is the people who vote who ultimately decide who the nominee is. That's how Mitt Romney became the nominee.”