SHIZUOKA, Japan — As Japan has ceded dominance in industry after industry that once lifted this nation to economic greatness, there has been plenty of blame to go around. A nuclear disaster that raised energy costs. A lack of entrepreneurship. China’s relatively cheap work force.

Increasingly, however, business leaders point to a punishing threat that is at least partly within the government’s power to control: a high yen that has made Japanese exports, from televisions to memory chips, prohibitively expensive abroad. In an echo of a debate that raged in the United States in the 1980s, the government faces growing criticism for doing almost nothing to rein in the yen, despite alarm that the record-high currency is dealing crippling blows to the country’s once all-important export machine.

One big reason, analysts and some politicians say, is simple, if generally left unsaid: A high yen benefits Japan’s rapidly expanding population of elderly residents, even if it hurts other parts of the country.

By speeding the flood of cheaper imported products into Japan, the strong yen is contributing to a broader drop in the prices of goods and services, known as deflation, that has helped retirees stretch their pensions and savings. The resulting inaction on the yen, according to a growing number of economists and politicians, reflects a new political reality, with already indecisive leaders loath to upset retirees from the postwar baby boom who tend to vote in high numbers.

“Japan’s tolerance of the strong yen and deflation is rooted in a clash of generations,” said Yutaka Harada, a professor of political science and economics at Waseda University in Tokyo “And for now, the seniors are winning.”

The problem, many economists warn, is that victory comes at a high price, hastening the hollowing out of Japan’s industrial base as companies continue to move abroad, exacerbating the nation’s two-decade-long relative economic decline. It may also, ultimately, be self-defeating by undermining the very industries that created the huge trade surpluses that sustained Japan’s still comfortable living standards.

Japan can trace the start of the yen’s latest rise to the worldwide economic panic that began in the United States and spread to Europe. Just before the first tremors of the American housing crisis appeared in 2007, the yen stood at 123 yen to the dollar, as the Bank of Japan kept interest rates low to stimulate growth, and money flowed out of Japan in search of higher returns.

After the crisis began, raising doubts about the soundness of American and European banks and the ability of governments to stand behind them, the tide of money reversed. Japan, with its huge security cushion of domestic savers, suddenly became a haven for investors, driving the yen up.

To be sure, it would not be easy to reverse the value of Japan’s currency; worldwide macroeconomic trends currently favor a strong yen. Nor are most experts suggesting that consideration of the elderly is the only cause of Japan’s political paralysis over how to revitalize its economy.

But breaking that stalemate is becoming harder as the political clout of the elderly grows. Even some retirees reveling in the benefits of the government’s inaction see the long-term quandary.

Shigeru Ono, a retired oil company manager who has won a small following blogging on deflation’s virtues, can tick off the strong yen’s advantages, including lower prices for shirts made in Vietnam and the Chinese flat-screen TV he bought recently. He is also clear on the perils.

“The strong yen and deflation have been a boon for us baby boomers,” said Mr. Ono, 62, who is living on limited savings and a fixed monthly pension of 130,000 yen, or about $1,650. “But I also know that they cannot be good for my son’s generation.”

Last year, the influx of products from abroad contributed to Japan’s first annual trade deficit in 31 years. That fact was shocking enough. Perhaps more worrisome for Japan’s manufacturers was that Japanese consumers — who once considered it a national duty to buy more expensive Japanese goods — were increasingly stocking their homes with products imported from China and elsewhere.

The office of Prime Minister Yoshihiko Noda has defended the government’s handling of the currency, pointing out in a response to questions that companies had been offered $6 billion in subsidies to help them move into higher-end products less affected by competition from other Asian exporters.

The Finance Ministry, meanwhile, has taken some steps to drive down the yen against the dollar, moving four times in the last two years to buy a total of $200 billion worth of the American currency. But officials said those amounts were never intended to do more than blunt surges driven by speculators.

A more effective step, economists said, would be for the central bank, the Bank of Japan, to essentially turn on the printing presses and create enough new yen to cause prices to rise rather than fall, encouraging the currency’s value to drop. The Federal Reserve has done just that in response to the financial crisis and the economic weakness in the United States, since 2007 tripling the amount of bonds it holds, weakening the value of the United States’ dollar and helping to foster a strong rise in American exports.

As the policy debate rages on, the supercharged yen bolsters the ability of Japanese to buy foreign goods and to travel abroad, but continues to eat away at the foundations of the economy, hurting companies from mighty Toyota to small ones like Kyouwa, a manufacturer of factory automation equipment in rural Seki, an hour west of the rust-belt city of Shizuoka.

Kyouwa’s second-generation owner, Ryuji Usuda, said he has been watching the rising yen with growing alarm and finally decided, after he lost an important Japanese customer last year to a Korean rival, that he had no choice but to move his production line to a new factory in Vietnam. He says the plant will allow him to make machines for 30 to 4o percent less than in Japan.

“Pretty soon, nothing will be made in Japan anymore,” said Mr. Usuda, 40, who noted that many of the Japanese factories he supplied were also moving to Southeast Asia.