Britain’s grading system is broken. At least, that’s what critics are saying about the 200-year-old tradition of classifying undergraduate degrees into five categories, from first class to fail.

In an attempt to improve the system, 21 universities started to experiment in November with an American-style grade-point average in hopes that it would be a better evaluation of students’ efforts and help solve grade inflation and other problems. A grade point average is calculated by adding up the grade points awarded to a student and dividing that total by the number of courses in which they were earned.

But not everyone in British academe is on board. Some say the effort is flawed from the start and may contribute to the erosion of centuries-old methods that undergird higher education here.

“I think this G.P.A. reform is a bit like giving academics American titles such as assistant, associate, or full professor. It’s the Americanization of higher education,” said Christopher Hill, head of the politics and international-studies department at the University of Cambridge. “I don’t think it will do what people are assuming it will do. I don’t think it’s likely to make much of a difference.”

With some similarities to the Latin honor system in the United States, British universities award degrees divided into five distinctions: first-class honors; second class, upper level (referred to as a 2.1); second class, lower (a 2.2); third class; and pass without honors.

Part of the issue with the system is that over time, a growing portion of students have earned a first-class degree or a 2.1. About two-thirds of the graduates in the summer of 2011 received those distinctions, according to the British Higher Education Statistics Agency.

What’s more, critics complain that the classification paints students with too broad a brush. It essentially divides students into two camps — those with a 2.1 and above and those with a 2.2 and below. Students in the latter category often feel they have failed, especially since employers often seek applicants with at least a 2.1. Proponents of G.P.A.s believe they can better portray the gradient of student achievement without creating such artificial divisions.

“While we need accurate assessments, the very sharp divide that has developed between the two degree classes is not helpful,” said Sir Robert Burgess, vice chancellor of the University of Leicester, who is supervising the G.P.A. test run at the 21 British universities.

“If the pilot is successful — and I don’t see why it should not be — reform will gather momentum, so that by the end of this decade I expect all U.K. universities to have adopted the national G.P.A. model that we are working on,” he said.

While adoption of G.P.A.s would be voluntary — the British government gives universities autonomy — the idea does have powerful backers. David Willetts, minister of state for universities and science, requested the G.P.A. study, which is being organized by the Higher Education Academy, an independent organization that supports teaching and learning. The group of universities involved includes big names like the University of Nottingham and University College London.

The universities are providing students both the traditional degree classification and a G.P.A., and this fall the academy plans to publish a report on participants’ experiences.

For Sir Robert, grading reform needs to be a priority for higher education. “We can and need to do better for our students,” he said.

Still, some academics are opposed to the change, as are some universities — notably Oxford and Cambridge, in part because a first-class degree from them is a social marker of significant achievement, held by high-profile figures including Prime Minister David Cameron.

Tradition aside, some opponents argue that the reform won’t achieve its desired goals: “I know one of the main arguments in favor of the G.P.A. is that it would do away with the ‘cliff edges’ between degree classifications and give a smoother, more continuous scale,” said Michael Kelly, head of modern languages at the University of Southampton. “But the argument against is that it simply introduces more cliff edges.”

He also expressed concern about the potential confusion new grading terms would cause. “A 2.1 is understood as meaning something,” he said.

Terence Kealey, vice chancellor of the University of Buckingham, doubted that the G.P.A. would do anything to alleviate grade inflation. “G.P.A.s are obviously fairer than traditional degree classifications as they contain more information and they abolish the near-arbitrary distinctions between the classes of degree,” he said. “They do not, however, address the major contemporary problem of degree inflation.”

Indeed, in the United States, despite use of the G.P.A., grade inflation remains a pressing concern.

Sir Robert counters that adopting the G.P.A. would be a first step toward a bigger discussion. “First, we have to establish that grade inflation is taking place, and the introduction of G.P.A. will result in a debate about marking practices,” he said.

He argued that it would better enable higher-education experts to keep tabs on whether grades are rising over time.

In the end, the issue could come down to the students. The National Union of Students, which has a representative on the committee overseeing the G.P.A. experiment, is anxious about how the change would work. It says it will support reform only if most British universities adopt the G.P.A. at the same time.

“The response of students and graduates is crucial,” said Andrew Wathey, vice chancellor of Northumbria University. “It will be interesting to see how that comes out of the pilot. Old-style prescriptive solutions are a thing of the past.”