Natalie Kitroeff, an editorial assistant, asked Nicholas Kristof to look back at  his reporting from Tiananmen Square, the site of pro-democracy protests in China 25 years ago, to reflect on what he might do differently now and how much has changed, or not changed, in China and in his own world view.

Q:  We just passed the 25th anniversary of the protests and massacre at Tiananmen Square. In a recent column you recalled covering those events with your wife, Sheryl WuDunn, which earned you both a Pulitzer Prize. Do you see that moment as a turning point that led to the very different China we know today?

A: It’s the turning point that wasn’t. The reformist Communist Party leaders, like Zhao Ziyang, Bao Tong, Hu Qili and Zhu Houze, envisioned responding to the democracy protests by turning the country toward political as well as economic reforms. They thought that China would go in the direction of Taiwan and South Korea, with free speech and free press. Instead, they were ousted, and hardliners won the political struggle. So China has blossomed economically but is still largely on the same trajectory that Deng Xiaoping set it on back in 1978.

Q: Your reporting from Tiananmen captured the drama of the massacre without the help of much of the technology we use today, say, during the Arab Spring uprising. Given your embrace of blogging and social media, would you cover that event differently today?

A: It would have been fabulous to have Twitter, Facebook, Google Plus and Instagram in China back then. Of course, it would be nice to have them in China today. There was a long period in the 2000s when China was steadily relaxing the rules on the Internet, but now the new emperor, Xi Jinping, is tightening them. That’s why readers in China aren’t able to read this article.

Q: You noted that many young people in China don’t know what happened in Tiananmen. Is there a sort of cultural memory loss in the country and if so, why?

A: To control a people, you control the narrative. China’s Communist Party has done that quite successfully, and in speaking Chinese it’s difficult to refer to the 1949 Communist revolution except as 解放, jie fang, or Liberation. The Maoist famine, the worst in world history, is known as 三年灾害, san nian zai hai, or three years of natural disasters, even though they were very much Communist Party-caused disasters. And the June 4 massacre of 1989 has been erased from history. But you can only do that so far: Truth festers. And the party has been unable to conceal the mindboggling corruption that is widely resented.

Q: You also said that Chinese protesters in 1989 were insisting that they wanted not just rice but rights. Do you think the country’s capitalist boom has provided so much “rice” they’ve forgotten about rights?

A. There has been an implicit deal: We’ll raise your living standards, and in exchange don’t complain about lack of political power. The problem is that when you raise living standards, create a middle class, educate people and build international connections, you also create demand for political participation. That’s the same process that unfolded in Franco’s Spain, Pinochet’s Chile, Chun Doo Hwan’s South Korea—and that’s why they’re all democratic today.

Q: You’ve been a columnist since 2001, the year of the 9/11 attacks. Do you feel you’ve been witness to a unique time in history?

A: I don’t know if it’s unique, but what a tumultuous time it has been. And what a privilege it has been to wield a journalistic spotlight during this time.

Q: You’re often out reporting in dangerous places. Has there ever been a time when you feared for your life?

A: Plenty of times. On some trips, I spend much of my time with a knot in my stomach. My most traumatic trip was to Congo to cover the civil war there. It began with an airplane crash. Then I was chased through the jungle for days by a warlord’s soldiers, after I interrupted them murdering Hutus. And in the course of that I caught the most lethal strain of malaria. After that, my wife pretty much put me in leg irons.

Q: When you write about the most urgent issues — war, human rights catastrophes, a global health crisis or any injustice — what do you hope to accomplish?

A: I think of myself as in the lighting business, not the heating business. So I want to spotlight global problems or injustices and make people spill their coffee in the morning. I want to project urgent issues onto the agenda, as the first step to getting them solved.

Q: Which of your columns have had the most impact, in your view?

A: My writing on hot-button topics hasn’t had much impact. In the six months leading to the Iraq war, I wrote endlessly (including from Iraq) about the foolishness of invading Iraq, and I didn’t convince anybody, including fellow liberals or even my own paper’s editorial page. Likewise, I’ve written interminably on gun violence and I don’t know that I changed anyone’s mind to favor limits on guns. But where it is possible to have more impact is to highlight a troubling issue and make people think about it—including people in the White House. So my columns on Darfur had an impact, I think, in calling attention to the crisis there and supporting efforts to provide aid. I think my columns on obstetric fistula helped make that issue much more prominent and get far more funding for it. And I think my columns on sex trafficking at home and abroad led to more awareness of what is, in its extreme, a modern form of slavery.

Q: What have you been wrong on in your time as an opinion columnist? Are there any columns you regret writing?

A:  Oh, I’ve been wrong about plenty of things. I regret writing columns about Steve Hatfill, the “person of interest” in the anthrax cases. Recently, there’ve been doubts raised about the back story of Somaly Mam, a Cambodian activist against human trafficking, and while I don’t know what the truth is, I wouldn’t have written about her if I’d been aware of the doubts. While some of my criticisms of the Iraq war were right, I warned that the war would trigger the Arab street to rise up and that turned out to be totally wrong — at the time! I wrote many columns saying that President Bush’s Iraq “surge” wouldn’t work, and in fact it pretty much did. I wrote a column saying that economic sanctions against Myanmar wouldn’t work, and they did.

There were also times when some nastiness crept into my tone toward people I disagreed with vehemently, and I regret that. It’s very easy in a column to smack people in power and taunt them (especially Republicans during the Bush years). I regret the mean-spiritedness that sometimes got the better of me.

Q: Does reporting on human suffering for so long ever get you down? Has it affected your sense of hope?

A: It’s a strange thing, but reporting on horrors can actually leave you feeling more optimistic about our species. The truth is that side by side with the worst kind of evil, you tend to find the greatest altruism and nobility. I remember interviewing a warlord in Congo who was responsible for mass rape and murder, and who underscored the human capacity for depravity. But I also met a little Polish nun who was singlehandedly feeding the starving, raising orphans and negotiating to keep the warlord at bay. She expressed her humanity by responding to evil with courage, decency and nobility in a way that left an even deeper impression on me than the warlord did. I actually returned from war-torn Congo feeling better about the capacity of humans, when tested, to do the right thing.