Updated

Hillary Clinton took clear command of the Democratic presidential race on Tuesday as she rolled to major victories over Bernie Sanders in Georgia and Virginia and proved for the first time that she could build a national coalition of racially diverse voters that would be crucial in the November election.

Based on initial results from the primaries and caucuses across 11 states, Clinton was strongly positioned to contain Sanders to liberal strongholds like his home state, Vermont, and, most critically, to hold down his vote totals in predominantly black and Hispanic areas of the South.

Because these regions had the largest trove of delegates to help propel her to the Democratic nomination, Clinton was expected to build an even bigger lead over Sanders than Barack Obama had over her at this point in the 2008 presidential race.

The contests on Tuesday were well suited to Clinton's strengths: her popularity with minority voters, her political kinship with Southern Democrats from her two decades in Arkansas, and her success in delegate-rich Texas in 2008.

Sanders' advisers, in turn, described Tuesday as their candidate's most difficult moment on the primary calendar, given the diverse electorate, the relative lack of states with huge liberal populations, and the dearth of caucuses — a format that Sanders believes favors him, even though Clinton won the first two caucus states.

While even the poorest showing would not drive Sanders from the presidential race, his advisers said, Clinton was already looking past her rival on Tuesday and toward the leading Republican candidate, Donald J. Trump, saying she was “very disappointed” that Trump initially refused to disavow support from David Duke, the former Ku Klux Klan leader.

“We can't let organizations and individuals that hold deplorable views about what it means to be an American be given any credence at all,” Clinton told reporters while campaigning at a Minnesota coffee shop. “I'm going to continue to speak out about bigotry wherever I see it or hear about it.”

Later, as news of her victories poured in, Clinton attended a gathering for black women in Florida and said she was thinking about “how can we get away from the insults and really mean-spirited language” in politics.

“I've been so impressed by the people I've met along the way,” Clinton said, mentioning the mothers of black sons who had been killed by gun violence or in clashes with the police. “They've been able to channel their grief into action.”

Sanders, who has also criticized Trump over the Duke endorsement, cast his ballot in the Vermont primary on Tuesday and held an early victory party shortly after he was declared the winner there at 7 p.m. “By the end of tonight, we are going to win many hundreds of delegates,” he predicted. “We have come a very long way in 10 months.”

Going into the nationwide contests, Clinton held a delegate lead of 91 to 65 over Sanders. About 880 of the 4,765 total delegates were at stake on Tuesday; under party rules, they will be awarded proportionally based on vote tallies for each of the candidates, with Democratic-leaning congressional districts and areas assigned the most delegates.

In Alabama, Georgia, and Virginia, blacks accounted for more than half the population in some districts, while Hispanics dominated many of the Texas Senate districts that allocated delegates on Tuesday. Clinton was expected to do so well in these regions that some of her allies believed she could build a lead of 100 delegates or more over Sanders, the same margin that Obama established in 2008 — and one that Clinton was never able to overcome.

In early exit polls by Edison Research on Tuesday night, Clinton was performing strongly with blacks in Virginia and Hispanics in Texas, the most powerful Democratic forces in those states. She was also running close to Sanders among white voters in both states.