When Victoria Baradi Anderson moved into the Union Square neighborhood in 1998, she was attracted to its central location and easy subway access. “I was single and enjoying the night life,” she said. After graduating from college and living with her parents for a year, she bought a studio on East 14th Street for less than $100,000. There was little in the surrounding streets that appealed to her, including the 3.6-acre park that gave the area its name and “was not as nice as it is now,” she said.

When she married in 2008, “my husband just moved in,” she said. Two years later, they had a child and bought a one-bedroom in the building, paying more than $600,000. Now, with two children, they spend most of their time close to home.

“The neighborhood just kind of kept on changing with me,” Mrs. Anderson said. “It kept giving me the things I need.”

These days, that includes a newly refurbished playground at the northern end of the park — part of a $20 million upgrade in that section — and a bustling farmer’s market four days a week, a Barnes & Noble with a large children’s section and a Babies “R” Us, among many other shiny new shops lining the streets around the park.

She and her husband, Christopher Anderson, a D.J., added to the child-oriented amenities by starting a monthly weekend brunch for young families at a restaurant on East 16th Street. “We love it here so much,” she said. “We know we have to move eventually, and we’d love to stay in the neighborhood if we could.”

That may not be so easy. The restaurateur Danny Meyer, who helped rehabilitate the neighborhood’s former seedy, drug-infested image when he opened his Union Square Cafe in 1985, said in June that he could not afford a huge rent increase he will face when his lease expires at the end of 2015 and will have to move out.

The climb in commercial leases is reflected in residential rents and purchase prices. “The area is just popping,” said Sasha Bruno, an agent with Town Real Estate. Janine Young, an agent with Bond New York, said, “There are no more bargains.”

Umber Ahmad, who for 10 years has rented a one-bedroom with a terrace in the Zeckendorf Towers condominium complex (completed in 1987 and credited as another factor in the area’s resurgence), said her rent has increased 65 percent — and is still under market, though she would not reveal the amount. Now the apartment’s owner has sold it, she said, and she plans to move to another rental in the neighborhood. But she fears she won’t be able to afford similar amenities, especially the terrace that holds plants she bought across the street.

“The biggest draw for me is the Greenmarket, having the farm-to-table experience by stepping outside your door,” said Ms. Ahmad, a former investment banker who has founded a bakery called Mah-Ze-Dahr, while still doing financial advising.

Rising prices, however, are changing the makeup of the community, she said, and higher commercial rents mean “only big-box stores or banks” move in. “I don’t want to live in a strip mall, and some of that is happening.” Still, the farmers will keep her around Union Square, she said. “Being in a city of 8 million people, it’s nice to be among people from the land.”

What You’ll Find

Union Square Park is a busy place, as are the streets around it. Union Square Partnership reports on pedestrian traffic on days when the Greenmarket is open say about 350,000 converge on the area on Mondays and Wednesdays, slightly fewer on Saturdays, and this past summer, a record-breaking 383,000 visited on Fridays. The area is the city’s top Citi Bike destination, with 485 docks, said Jennifer Falk, the executive director of the nonprofit partnership. Recently added park amenities include new bistro tables, chairs and umbrellas, an expanded playground, new restrooms, enhanced Wi-Fi and three solar-powered docking stations for electronic devices, she said.

In May, the Pavilion, a seasonal restaurant, opened within and in front of a handsomely restored columned structure that had long been neglected — and had long caused controversy. The Union Square Community Coalition, which opposed the cafe, favored using the pavilion for community activities. “Another restaurant is obviously not needed,” said Geoffrey Croft, a board member, pointing out the area’s many other places to eat.

The 24/7 activity has drawn tech companies, with employees who work and take breaks at any time of day, Ms. Falk said. Among new or expanded office tenants in the area are Mashable, Spotify, Yelp and Zillow. Students from New York University, the New School and other colleges also live in the neighborhood, said Uri Hanoch, a broker with Douglas Elliman Real Estate who moved there as a student about 20 years ago.

The rapid growth has resulted in a jumble of styles, with a historic statue of George Washington gazing across 14th Street toward a 100-foot-high modern artwork on the facade of One Union Square South called Metronome that tracks the time and the phases of the moon, and periodically emits puffs of steam. Glass-walled buildings nestle among more traditional ones, like the former Tammany Hall, now home to a theater and a film school.

What You’ll Pay

Apartment prices have increased significantly over last year, said Ms. Bruno of Town Real Estate, citing figures she prepared for the area that stretches from 13th to 18th Streets and Fifth Avenue to Irving Place, one of several ways to define the neighborhood. From Jan. 1 to Sept. 8, the average price for studios increased about 2.8 percent to $577,286 from $561,698 in the comparable period in 2013; one-bedrooms rose about 12.1 percent to $1,189,684 from $1,060,654; two-bedrooms, 28.5 percent to $1,971,122 from $1,533,648; and three-bedrooms, 4.2 percent to $3,848,721 from $3,692,825.

The number of apartments sold, however, slipped to 43 from 65, which she attributed to a low inventory that may increase as the year progresses. Rents are high, too, Ms. Bruno said, with one-bedrooms “easily $4,000 to $5,000,” and some three-bedrooms more than $30,000 a month.

What to Do

Peter Prinstein, a vice president at the investment management firm PIMCO who moved into a two-bedroom apartment on East 14th Street three years ago, said he is a movie buff and regularly visits the Regal Union Square Stadium 14 at 850 Broadway and, for art house films, the Cinema Village at 22 East 12th Street. (There are also several Off Broadway theaters.) As “an amateur chef,” he said, he likes the neighborhood’s Whole Foods and Garden of Eden, and, of course, the Greenmarket.

Exercise is another popular pastime. “We have a host of gyms in the neighborhood,” he said. Mr. Hanoch of Douglas Elliman likes the annual Union Square Holiday Market and the summer concerts. A free walking tour leaves at 2 p.m. on Saturdays from the Abraham Lincoln statue at 16th Street.

The Schools

Many parents send their children to Public School 40, which received an A rating from the Department of Education, followed by Middle School 104, also with an A rating. Washington Irving High School, which was the only high school in the neighborhood, is being phased out, and its campus at 40 Irving Place now hosts five high schools with specialized curriculums and a school for kindergarten to Grade 2. P.S. 340 opened this month at 590 Sixth Avenue, taking only prekindergarten and kindergarten students but scheduled to expand.

The Commute

The 14th Street Union Square Station is a stop on the L, N, Q, R, 4, 5 and 6 lines. Around a half-dozen bus lines run through the neighborhood.

The History

The park got its name because of its location at the intersection of Bloomingdale Road (now Broadway) and Bowery Road (now Fourth Avenue), according to the city parks department’s website. It opened to the public in 1839. The grounds have often served as a gathering place for parades, political rallies and other meetings. It deteriorated during the 1970s. Renovations started in 1985.