Read Part 1 of this serial here.

Read Part 2 of this serial here.

The explosion at the checkpoint in May 2012 kicked a cloud of dust high into the sky. Afghan militia members jumped on their motorcycles and rode down to investigate, soon returning to the base with their fallen comrade in the back of a truck.

Their search for suspects led them to a trio of itinerant scrap merchants and some villagers who had contact with them. The three men, Pashtuns who had been in town for little more than a week, eked out their living collecting junk: old car parts, empty oil drums, aluminum cans. One of the three, Assadullah, 25 — who, like many Afghans, goes by only one name — said they had risen before dawn to secure the cargo in their three-wheel motorized rickshaw and had been eating bread and drinking tea before the bomb exploded.

The police officers entered the room in a market stall where the men were staying and began bludgeoning them — Mr. Assadullah; Muhammad Hashem, about 24; and Faisal Rehmat, about 25 — with their rifle butts. “They just started hitting us,” Mr. Assadullah recalled in an interview, “on our shoulders, on our backs, everywhere.”

They bound the men’s hands with their traditional wool scarves and marched them to the outpost more than a kilometer away. “Along the road, they were beating us with stones and rifles,” Mr. Assadullah said. He added that he had seen other Afghan civilians at the base but that they had been kept separate during questioning.

The mistreatment was hardly unique for some of the police militias. From the outset of the program, the Americans running it found that some officers used their newfound power to engage in everything from petty theft and bullying to extortion rackets and killings.

An American military report released in December 2011found that local police militias were illegally taxing villagers and committing assaults, yet also concluded that the militias were effective.

By the day of the episode in Kalach, the Americans were getting ready to move to another region with higher security needs. Just 14 American servicemen remained: six Navy SEALs, four naval support personnel and four soldiers, plus an interpreter hired through a private contractor.

The soldiers provided security for the outpost while three of the SEALs helped question the prisoners, who were handcuffed with their arms behind them.

Sergeant Roschak and Specialist Walker stood on the roof of the meeting room, about 60 yards from where the detainees were being questioned. They and other witnesses, who had different vantage points, said there had been six to eight prisoners. The other two soldiers were on the roof of the SEALs’ barracks, about 135 yards away. “Enjoy the show,” one of the SEALs said, according to Sergeant Roschak’s statement to the N.C.I.S.

The three enlisted Team 2 members — David Swarts and Daniel D’Ambrosio, who were petty officers first class, and Xavier Silva, a petty officer second class — took the lead in interrogating the detainees, the soldiers told investigators. Their officer, a young lieutenant junior grade named Jason Webb, was mostly engaged elsewhere at the base, they said.

Mr. Assadullah said three Americans and an Afghan militia commander had interrogated him three times, for up to 10 minutes each time. The Americans grabbed him by the throat and kneed him in the stomach several times, he recalled, and said he would be freed if he told them who had set off the bomb. “But I didn’t know who did it,” Mr. Assadullah said.

The soldiers told investigators that they had seen the three enlisted SEALs kick prisoners and fire handguns next to their heads; at one point, two of them forced a detainee’s legs apart so they could drop a large rock on his crotch. Three of the soldiers said that the SEALs had also dropped stones on other prisoners. One soldier recalled seeing a Team 2 member standing on a detainee’s head “maybe eight to 10 times.” In his sworn statement to investigators, he recounted, “When he would step on the guy’s head, I could see the detainee’s legs move a little.”

Specialist Walker told investigators that he had seen one of the SEALs “straddling the detainee over his upper torso area and pouring water on the detainee’s head.” Another soldier told N.C.I.S. agents that he had watched as an American poured water on a detainee who was lying on his back. He said that he had not seen the water going into the man’s mouth, but that it had appeared he was choking. The process, the soldier said, was repeated with four more prisoners, including one with a cloth in his mouth.

After about two hours, by Sergeant Roschak’s estimate, the SEALs told the soldiers to stand down, saying they had the situation under control. The soldiers complied — in part, several said, because they did not want to see any more.

While the SEALs and militiamen remained suspicious of some detainees, they let them all go by midafternoon. Before setting them free, the Americans took one of the junk merchants, Mr. Hashem, who was bloody and weak from the ordeal, and placed an AK-47 across his chest for a photograph, Mr. Assadullah said. He said he figured it was because Mr. Hashem had a long beard and looked more like a Taliban fighter than anyone else.

The villagers from Kalach were told to walk in one direction and the three scrap dealers in another, up a hillside. Mr. Hashem could barely move, Mr. Assadullah recalled. He was bleeding from a gash near the top of his skull, and his back was injured from repeated blows from rocks and rifle butts.

Mr. Hashem made it only a short distance before collapsing. Some militiamen rushed over and began hitting the three men again, Mr. Assadullah said. “ ‘Why can’t you climb? Why aren’t you climbing the mountain like we said?’ ” he recalled them asking. “I could not carry him because I was also beaten.”

After the militiamen left, Mr. Hashem showed his friends his abdomen, which was bloody and bruised. “I feel pain here, and I cannot walk,” he said, according to Mr. Assadullah.

Mr. Assadullah said that some Americans — it is not clear who — had come with water and a stretcher. He and Mr. Rehmat lifted the injured man onto it, then dragged the stretcher up the dirt road, Mr. Hashem moaning with each bump. Every time they stopped, Mr. Assadullah said, someone fired at them from the base.

Once out of sight, they paused to rest under a mulberry tree. Mr. Hashem became silent, Mr. Assadullah remembered. Soon after, he died.

The two surviving junk sellers found a truck driver willing to drive them all night back to Mr. Hashem’s home village, Shamakhel. In accordance with Islamic custom, Mr. Assadullah said, a funeral and burial were quickly arranged, drawing 200 people. Mr. Hashem left behind a wife and newborn son.

