For all of her famed competence, Hillary Clinton has also been, from the beginning, something of a stumbler. While she was still a prospective first lady, she famously insulted all those cookie-baking mothers of the world; there was a gap between her and everywoman, and she walked right into it with a misstep that colored her public persona going forward. She has stumbled in traps of her own making — those emails — and traps set by others.

And yet, even after years of those missteps, Clinton has always somehow righted herself. She has withstood not just her own missteps but also the relentless attacks on her personally: on her cankles, her coldness, her hairstyles, her marital choices, her audacity, her arrogance, her calculatedness. This summer, a gift shop at Baltimore-Washington International Airport sold a novelty item called the “inflatable mini Hillary bop bag”; the box displays a large, presumably male fist in contact with the side of Clinton’s head and the words: “She falls down, but pops back up!” It is a hateful and misogynist object that can’t hide its grudging admiration, which is much of Hillary Clinton’s public perception in a nutshell.

That hard-won resiliency provides an unavoidable — even poignant — subtext of the widely viewed video that surfaced yesterday, showing Clinton stumbling as she tried to enter a waiting van following a sudden departure from a Sept. 11 memorial event. A young woman — it is touching that it is a young woman — is holding her under her left arm as they wait for her vehicle to pull up. Clinton sways backward before moving forward. She stumbles a little, wobbles from side to side, then stumbles again and again, each time moving a bit more erratically.

The door of the van is just a few feet away. Inside that door is safety, privacy, a quick escape to her daughter’s home; no one will be the wiser if she can just get to the car. Surely she can make it that far. She is, for better or for worse, Iron Woman, who stumbles but never falls — until she does. She almost disappears from sight as she plunges, her weight supported by the security team around her. Her feet scrape the ground.

It turned out to be pneumonia, which her team knew as early as Friday. It’s her lungs that were impaired, not her brain, as Tom Brokaw originally rushed to suggest on “Meet the Press”; she should see a neurologist, he said. But instead, it was a problem of breath, a kind of small suffocation.

It seems unlikely that Donald Trump has familiarized himself with Susan Sontag’s “Illness as Metaphor,” in which Sontag argued that illness is often perceived as a result of weak character traits. But for weeks, Trump seemed to be working off some kind of Sontag-inspired playbook. Clinton was not just lacking in the physical stamina required to fight ISIS, he said, “but the mental stamina”; his team often spoke of her as “frail.”

In turning illness into a personality flaw, a dangerous side effect of femaleness, Trump most likely made it all the more difficult for Clinton to acknowledge straightaway whatever health issue was in fact troubling her, whenever it kicked in in earnest. We now know she had a diagnosis of pneumonia at least two days before she declared to the press outside her daughter’s apartment, using language that might have been drafted by the world’s lamest crisis manager, that she was “feeling great” and that it was “a beautiful day in New York.” To confirm that she was sick, when she had any other choice, might be to confirm all the other absurdist allegations from Trump’s team; was it also irrefutable evidence that she did not have “a presidential look”?

The Friday before the Sept. 11 event, Clinton made yet another misstep, saying that some portion of Trump’s supporters belonged in a “basket of deplorables.” And given her reputation, deserved or not, for secrecy and untrustworthiness, delaying revealing the truth was a risky strategy. Her fans tried to portray it as something else: Toughing it out by showing up at the event in the first place showed incredible stamina, admirable stamina, they argued. It was just like a woman to get on with her work despite feeling ill — it’s what women do.

Sontag warned against conflating physical illness with any kind of mental state. “Theories that diseases are caused by mental states … are always an index of how much is not understood about the physical terrain of a disease,” she wrote.

To make a metaphor of sickness is usually to imply judgment. In the narrative of this particular, strange election cycle, Clinton’s moment of evident illness will surely come to symbolize something. What that is, exactly, depends on how crudely, how truthfully, campaigners on both sides manipulate or manage a subject that is both intimately personal and yet significant for the public. The body politic will be watching closely, knowing that its health, even more than hers, is in need of good care.