MEXICO CITY — Mexican authorities on Monday continued their manhunt for Joaquín Guzmán Loera, the country’s most notorious drug kingpin, as many Mexicans expressed disbelief at his stunning escape and wondered how much of the government’s waning credibility may have slipped away through the tunnel that carried the trafficker to freedom.

“They’re all in it together, they’re all accomplices,” said José Manuel Gil, 61, a grocery shop owner, in Mexico City. “These all-mighty criminals are so powerful, I have an impression they have a direct line to the president, to let him know what they are doing and just wiring millions to buy off their free rein.”

The stunning escape of Mr. Guzmán, known as “El Chapo,” or “Shorty,” from what was supposed to be the country’s most secure prison was the latest blow to an already weakened President Enrique Peña Nieto. It fed a deep cynicism in Mexico about the country’s leadership and its corruption-riddled institutions.

“The lack of rule of law, the stain of corruption and the disaster of the criminal system in Mexico is probably Mexico’s No. 1 problem,” said Enrique Krauze, a historian. “The escape only underlines the cruel and bitter reality. We need to reform the system starting from its roots.”

Of Mr. Guzmán’s escape he added, “Our worst nightmare has happened. This has a terrible weight, real and symbolic.”

On Saturday night, Mr. Guzmán entered the shower area of his cell and dropped through a small opening in the floor, about 20 inches on each side. He climbed down a ladder in a vertical shaft, then continued through an elaborately constructed tunnel about a mile long that ended in a small house on a construction site in a nearby community.

When guards noticed that he had not come out of the shower, they sounded the alarm, but by then he had disappeared. The escape was announced Sunday morning.

Local news media reported on Monday that the head of the Altiplano prison, which is about a 90 minute drive west of Mexico City, had been detained and was being questioned by investigators, along with about 30 other prison employees.

“It’s unbelievable,” said Alma Camarena Díaz, 54, of Mexico City. “The level of corruption in this country, it is just everywhere.”

Mr. Guzmán, who is believed to be in his late 50s, rose through the ranks of Mexico’s drug syndicates to lead what is known as the Sinaloa Cartel, the country’s most powerful and, according to American authorities, the source of the greatest amount of drugs flowing into the United States. He is an underworld figure of mythical proportions and had once before escaped from prison, by bribing guards and, by some accounts, hiding in a laundry cart.

His latest escape was also a blow to the country’s main drug war strategy, carried out with help from the United States, of going after the leaders of violent trafficking gangs.

Mr. Guzmán’s arrest in 2014 by the Mexican authorities, aided by intelligence provided by the United States, was at the time a coup for Mr. Peña Nieto, who sought to use it as a show of his government’s effectiveness.

But now Mr. Peña Nieto’s own words may come back to haunt him.

In a television interview just after Mr. Guzmán was captured last year, Mr. Peña Nieto was told that many Mexicans believed it was likely that he would escape again.

Mr. Peña Nieto said that a second escape would be “unforgivable.”

“This is a responsibility that the government has taken on, to assure that the escape that occurred a few years ago is not repeated,” the president said, adding that his government would be asking every day: “Is he being properly watched? Is he secure?”

Some Mexicans reacted to the escape with black humor. The sophisticated tunnel built to whisk Mr. Guzmán to freedom led some to joke that the drug traffickers were better at building infrastructure than the government. That included a new subway line in Mexico City, which has been plagued by problems, prompting quips that the project should be handed over to Mr. Guzmán and his minions.

When Mr. Peña Nieto took office in December 2012, he attempted to shift the focus of the country and its image away from that of a nation rived by drug violence and corruption, and pressed ahead with reforms that many Mexicans felt were long overdue.

Though rattled, the president has tried to position Mexico as a country on the move economically, no longer mired in the violence of the drug war and the corruption of past administrations.

Yet episodes of extreme violence and corruption continued to drag the country back into the spotlight.

New gangs began to emerge as the security institutions broke apart the older, more established criminal groups. It often led to more infighting between the smaller players.

In early May, members of the New Generation gang fired a rocket-propelled grenade into an army helicopter, killing eight soldiers in a round of violence that claimed the lives of more than a dozen security forces. The emergence of the gang, forged from the pieces of other networks whose prominence had waned, was a stunning reminder of the flexibility and deadliness of the syndicates.

The most devastating example of the nation’s inability to establish the rule of law across large swaths of the country was the disappearance last year of 43 students in the state of Guerrero.

Investigators revealed that the mayor of the town of Iguala had been working with a gang in the area and had turned the students over to its members, who, the authorities have said, killed them and burned the remains. Scores of police officers were also arrested in the episode.

In the search for the students, the mass graves of others were uncovered, revealing the extent of violence in the region.

“What the escape really tells us about Mexico is the extreme difference between the quality and professionalism within the government,” said Viridriana Rios, a security analyst and director of a civic group. “You have an elite government that is able to capture drug traffickers and approve reforms the country has been waiting to see for decades, but all of the major scandals in terms of the security have come from the inability of the federal government to control the state and local governments.”

Alejandro Hope, a security expert and former intelligence officer, said the escape undermines Mr. Peña Nieto’s main narrative: that he gets things done, in contrast to the incompetence of previous governments.

“A subtext of this is that crime and violence were the result of the ineptness” of previous administrations, he said. “Now that the smart guys were in charge, those things would not happen. Woops.”