WASHINGTON — Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. showed up late at an event last week, saying he was delayed because “the president keeps those meetings going longer.” But he walked into a Hillary Clinton crowd. Outside, supporters hoisted signs urging her to run for president. Inside, she was greeted as a hero.

Not that Mr. Biden was an afterthought. He had plenty of friends in the room. But at the Kennedy Center, where women’s achievements were being honored by an organization Mrs. Clinton helped found, even Mr. Biden recognized that the best applause line belonged to her. “There’s no woman like Hillary Clinton,” he said. “That’s a fact.”

Mr. Biden faces a situation unique in the annals of modern American politics. He is the vice president, the highest-ranking member of his party interested in running for president, yet he is not the heir apparent. While every sitting vice president who sought it in the last half-century captured his party’s nomination, Mr. Biden would start as the underdog if he ran against Mrs. Clinton, the former secretary of state.

“It’s no secret that he’s thinking about this,” his son Beau, the attorney general of Delaware, said in an interview. “I’m glad he’s thinking about this. But he hasn’t made up his mind.”

As the vice president thinks, he is also laying groundwork. He attended a pre-inaugural party with Democrats from Iowa, the first caucus state, and invited the governor of New Hampshire, the first primary state, to his private swearing-in ceremony. In two other likely early primary states, he will address the Democratic State Convention in South Carolina next month and appear at a testimonial for the retiring Senator Carl Levin in Michigan. He is enlisting candidates and collecting money for midterm elections.

“He is already generating lots of good will among House Democrats and Democratic candidates across the country,” said Representative Steve Israel of New York, the chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee. “He is diving into races. He is making recruiting calls. He is fund-raising. He is firing up our core supporters across the country.”

Aides said Mr. Biden would do those things regardless of his own ambitions. And the preliminary moves do not address the more fundamental challenge: How would he run against Mrs. Clinton, who seemed to be Mr. Obama’s anointed heir in a joint interview they gave to the CBS program “60 Minutes” earlier this year? Mr. Biden would not have exclusive claim to the Obama legacy and, like any vice president, he would need to distinguish himself from the departing president. He could run to the left of her, emphasizing a more populist approach. Or he could run as the insurance policy in case she does not run or if she falters.

It is not clear that a presidential campaign makes sense for Mr. Biden, who would turn 74 shortly after the 2016 general election and 82 before the end of a second term.

But it is in his interest to keep the option open as long as possible to maintain his influence and to see what Mrs. Clinton decides to do. The moment Mr. Biden declares he will not run, he becomes a lame-duck No. 2 in a lame-duck administration.

Days before he was inaugurated in 2009, Mr. Biden said in an interview with The New York Times that he did not plan to run in 2016. “That is not my intention,” he said. “This is in all probability, and hopefully, a worthy capstone in my career.”

At the time, aides said that would make Mr. Biden a more valuable vice president because, unlike Al Gore, he could sublimate his own ambitions. But something changed along the way: Mr. Biden found the White House reinvigorating after 36 years in the Senate and stopped ruling out another campaign.

“I think he got into it,” said former Senator Ted Kaufman, a longtime adviser who assumed Mr. Biden’s seat in Delaware. “In retrospect, he should have known then that he would get into it.”

Should he run, it would be Mr. Biden’s third presidential campaign — and the first two did not go well. He campaigned as a promising upstart in 1988 before being driven out for lifting lines from a British politician’s speech without attributing them during a debate. (He had attributed them on other occasions.) Then he ran as an elder statesman in 2008 before being swamped by Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton, drawing just 1 percent in the Iowa caucuses.

Since then, his public identity has evolved. An archetype of one, Mr. Biden comes across as a genial, idiosyncratic uncle, a loquacious storyteller with distinctive verbal tics and unrestrained by the filter that governs many political figures. If his critics consider him a blowhard, he connects with everyday voters in a way that the more reserved Mr. Obama does not.

“The public reacts to that,” said Joe Slade White, a political consultant who has worked for Mr. Biden for 18 years. “They don’t want a calculated president. They want authenticity.”

Still, as the event last week at the Kennedy Center demonstrated, Mrs. Clinton commands the most attention. Her favorable rating stood at 63 percent last month in a CNN/ORC poll, while Mr. Biden’s was 44 percent.

“It’ll be very different than the other two races,” said Mr. Kaufman. “If he decides to do it, it will be a different kind of race.”

But, he added, “there will be a thousand things to consider first.”