Monaco, a constitutional monarchy on the Riviera measuring less than a square mile, evokes high-stakes gambling, multimillion-dollar yachts, Russian oligarchs, racecar drivers, James Bond films, spotless sidewalks and no public debt. Hotel suites with a view of the sea during the Grand Prix can cost thousands, even tens of thousands, of euros. A starter of pea soup with gnocchi goes for 76 euros (about $100) at the Louis XV, Alain Ducasse’s Michelin three-star restaurant at the Hôtel de Paris. Monaco is a place where high-priced female “escorts” with long legs and exotic accents decorate the nightclubs and hotel lobbies. Visitors can drop their dogs off at free kennels, and car owners feel safe enough to leave their keys in the ignition. Prince Albert II is pushing to make Monaco a family-friendly, environmentally correct vacation spot. Look hard enough and you will discover a world of art, natural beauty and good food and lodging at affordable prices.

FRIDAY

4 p.m.
1. An American Princess

The story of Grace Kelly — the Oscar-winning American actress who married a prince, became a princess and died tragically — is woven into the fabric of Monaco’s history. An avenue, a rose garden, a foundation, even a polka-dotted fish have been named after her. Her body is buried alongside that of her husband, Prince Rainier III, in the Roman-Byzantine-style Monaco Cathedral. You can get close to her spirit in a second-story suite known as the Princess Grace Irish Library. Her personal Irish book collection is here, as is her sheet music, a scrapbook of news clippings about her, floral napkins she designed for Springmaid, the chairs from the dining room of her apartment in Paris and the sewing box of her mother. Open Monday to Friday, 9 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., although it’s best to call ahead. Or by appointment.

6:30 p.m.
2. Night Out

Head up to the Jardin Exotique district and stop at La Chaumière restaurant for a cocktail and a postcard-perfect view of Monaco. It is just about the only public spot where you can see the palace from above. Then make your way to La Piazza, where the chef and owner Giovanni Orsolini prepares the best Northern Italian cooking in Monaco. The restaurant specializes in seafood and features such signature dishes as stuffed zucchini flowers with ricotta and tomato and the lightest cannelloni filled with pumpkin or veal. A mural of the main square in Mr. Orsolini’s home town of Ascoli Piceno fills one of the peach-colored walls. Dinner for two with wine: about 120 euros, or $155, at $1.29 to the euro.

10:30 p.m.
3. Not for Gamblers Only

The Casino de Monte-Carlo is an architectural delight. Inaugurated in 1863, reconstructed in 1878 by Charles Garnier, it has an atrium paved in marble and surrounded by 28 Ionic columns in onyx. On one side, the Opera Hall, with red and gold décor, bas-reliefs and sculptures, is an ode to Garnier’s other masterpiece, the Paris Opéra. On the other is the Casino itself (which you can visit without having to play). It leads into the newly renovated Salle Blanche, which opens to the sea. It’s the most elegant place in town to have a cocktail and hear live music.

SATURDAY

10 a.m.
4. Sea and Gardens

Prince Albert I was a scientist and an oceanographer as well as a sovereign. He built the Musée Océanographique in 1910 as a temple of the sea combining art and science. The building pays homage to the Mediterranean: the facade is decorated with crabs, shrimp, scorpion fish, jelly fish, calamari eggs and other oddities from the deep; the mosaic floors evoke the sea. Albert’s whaling ship and Jacques Cousteau’s diving bell are here. The aquarium features a world-class collection, including sharks and aging octopuses and tortoises. Admission is 14 euros. Then it’s back to dry land at Jardin Exotique. More than 1,000 varieties of exotic cactuses and other succulents grow between the rocks and on the steep crags in this botanical garden under the supervision of Monaco’s City Hall. Cactuses along the pathways look like huge sticks of fur; succulents form archways. Park benches offer views of the water. The charming carved footbridges appear to be wood, but are actually made of concrete. Below is a prehistoric cave complete with stalagmites and stalactites.

12:30 p.m.
5. Classy Fast Food

Every morning, the Place d’Armes esplanade in the heart of Monaco pitches red and yellow shade umbrellas and becomes an open-air food and flower market, the Marché de la Condamine. Some of the vendors come from their farms in Italy 100 miles away, bringing with them homemade olive oil and jars of preserved vegetables. Indoors are more than a dozen cafeteria-style operations. Eat Juice offers six small vegetarian dishes for 15 euros. Lapitxuri serves a sandwich with Bellota pata negra cured ham for 7 euros. Le Comptoir prepares fresh dishes like a mountain of fried squid for 12 euros.

2 p.m.
6. Secondhand Luxury

Even if you can’t afford the black crocodile Birkin bag at Le Dressing for 28,000 euros, you might fall in love with a Stephen Sprouse leather jacket with a painted image of Marilyn Monroe on the back for 1,590 euros, or red patent leather Yves Saint Laurent pumps at 195 euros. Le Dressing’s shops in La Condamine are worth a look. Much of the inventory is new. “Women in Monaco can’t wear the same dress twice,” said Helen Rimsberg, the shops’ owner. “Otherwise people would think your husband had money problems.”

3:30 p.m.
7. Art Comes First

There are no candles to light or Masses at the Musée de la Chapelle de la Visitation. No organ, no incense, no flowers. But masterpieces by Rubens, Zurbarán, Ribera and Italian Baroque masters, in the collection of Barbara Piasecka Johnson, the Polish-born American philanthropist, hang on the walls. Look for the 15th-century Pietà in wood by an unknown German sculptor.

5 p.m.
8. Upscale Souvenirs

Martine Rosticher makes beautiful paper to create bookmarks, picture frames, notebook covers. Her husband, Claude, paints watercolors. Together they run Les Feuillets, a shop that also sells old postcards and magazines featuring Monaco. (Like the 1956 issue of Paris-Match with the Grace Kelly-Prince Rainier wedding on the cover for 35 euros.) If there’s time, take a tour of the “Grands Appartements” of the palace nearby. Not Versailles, but still impressive. Closed from Nov. 1 to March 28; open 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. the rest of the year.

6 p.m.
9. A Quiet Walk

It is hard to find markers indicating that you’ve left Monaco and crossed into France. On one side of the Avenue du Port is the Fontvieille district of Monaco, on the other (French) side, the Riviera Marriott. To the left of the hotel is a walkway that borders the water. Expect to see beach volleyball players, belle époque villas, catamarans, joggers and fishing boats. Stone steps lead down to sheltered coves where you can skip stones and be alone. You can turn back anywhere along the way, or go to the end (three hours round-trip) at Cap d’Ail’s Plage Mala, a beautiful hidden cove.

8:30 p.m.
10. Dinner by the Sea

Back in Cap d’Ail near the Marriott is A’Trego, a futuristic complex that juts out into the sea and offers three dining spaces. La Cantine is the liveliest. Designed by Philippe Starck, it serves a bargain tasting menu: three starters, three entrees and three desserts for 50 euros (without wine). If you’re lucky, the singer-guitarist William Jones will be performing. Take the free shuttle bus back to your hotel — or free shuttle boat service to your yacht.

SUNDAY

7:30 a.m.
11. If I Were a Rich Man

Driving is not the best way to get around Monaco; the public bus and free electric bike systems are much more efficient. But you can live the fantasy of driving up and down the winding hairpin turns of the Riviera in a sports car. Monaco Luxury Rent rents cars like Ferraris and Lamborghinis for a minimum of 24 hours. (Reserve the car the day before and expect to pay at least 1,500 euros.) O.K., you only have a few hours. But hey, this is a fantasy.

10 a.m.
12. New Monaco

With a focus on modern and contemporary works of art, architecture and design, the Nouveau Musée National de Monaco has relocated to two locations: the Villa Paloma high above the principality and the Villa Sauber down by the sea. There is no permanent collection, but the temporary exhibitions can include paintings, sculpture, photographs, videos, films, costumes and Monégasque history. Free on the first Sunday of every month. Otherwise, admission to both is six euros.

Noon
13. Not On Any Map

Hidden on a path off the Avenue des Pins, near the Pavillon Bosio, is the Club Bouliste du Rocher, a private club for boules players. Pay no attention to the sign in French on the gate that says members only. Alba Luci and Christiana Ruggiero, the cooks, prepare three-course meals served on the terrace; 16 euros with wine. You can watch the action on the boules field, play cards with the locals or savor the view of Port Hercule below.

THE DETAILS

1. Princess Grace Irish Library, 9, rue Princesse Marie-de-Lorraine; pgil.mc.

2. La Chaumière, Rond Point du Jardin Exotique; la-chaumiere.mc; La Piazza, 9, rue du Portier, (377) 93-50-47-00.

3. Casino de Monte Carlo, Place du Casino; casinomontecarlo.com.

4. Musée Océanographique, Avenue St-Martin; oceano.mc; Jardin Exotique, 62, boulevard du Jardin Exotique; jardin-exotique.mc.

5. Marché de la Condamine, place d’Armes; mairie.mc/poles/pratique/les-marches.

6. Le Dressing, 2, rue des Orangers; 1, rue Princesse Florestine; ledressingmonaco.com.

7. Musée de la Chapelle de la Visitation, Place de la Visitation, (377) 93-50-07-00.

8. Les Feuillets, 32, rue Comte Félix Gastaldi; jsm999.free.fr/gaulaf. Palais Princier de Monaco; palais.mc.

9. Cap d’Ail.

10. A’Trego, Port de Cap d’Ail; byatrego.com.

11. Monaco Luxury Rent, monacoluxuryrent.com.

12. Nouveau Musée National de Monaco, Villa Paloma, 56, boulevard du Jardin Exotique, and Villa Sauber, 17, avenue Princesse Grace; nmnm.mc.

13. Club Bouliste du Rocher, Avenue des Pins; cbrmonaco.com.

LODGING

Hôtel Novotel (16, boulevard Princesse Charlotte; novotel.com) is a wonderful place for families. Children under 16 stay free. Double rooms in low season start at 138 euros, 193 in high season. Hôtel Columbus (23, avenue des Papalins; columbushotels.com) has contemporary interiors, features a vodka bar and overlooks the Princess Grace Rose Garden. Double rooms in low season start at 160 euros, 190 in high.