DES MOINES, Iowa — Iowa, widely derided for being unlike the rest of the United States, was supposed to be irrelevant this year as the presidential race became nationalized — thanks to widely viewed televised debates and the rise of social media.

But as the Iowa caucuses loom on Monday — the first votes after 1,500 candidate rallies, 60,000 TV ads and a nail-biting tightening of the polls here — the state’s voters are poised to play their most significant role ever in both parties’ nominating contests. And their embrace of candidates on the ideological fringes has amplified a national grass-roots rebellion against establishment politicians.

Both Democrats and Republicans have seen their presumptive nominees of a year ago — deeply experienced, proven political leaders — brushed aside by Iowans in favor of idol-smashing outsiders.

“There’s a tremendous amount of anti-establishment, anti-Washington sentiment here, and I would not be surprised if an outsider on both sides wins,” said Gov. Terry E. Branstad, a Republican, who has exerted himself in an unheard-of effort to derail one of his own party’s front-runners, Senator Ted Cruz.

Voters on the ideological edges, who dominate both parties in Iowa, have made Senator Bernie Sanders, a self-described democratic socialist, and Donald J. Trump and Mr. Cruz, whose views are anathema to Republican leadership, the standard-bearers of the left and the right.

The embrace of Mr. Sanders and Mr. Trump, visible nationally in huge rallies, has stirred Iowa’s latent Midwest populism, with voters angry about the hollowing out of the middle class, Wall Street greed and the corrupting influence of money in politics. It has created two insurgents who in some ways are opposite sides of the same coin.

The policies of President Obama have added accelerant to the fire, with the far left unhappy he did not go far enough, and the right convinced he radically changed the United States.

“There’s a very disaffected segment of Republican voters and Democratic voters who just want to throw ’em all out,” said David Redlawsk, a political scientist at Rutgers University who wrote a book about the Iowa caucuses. “These particular voters have been told for several cycles, ‘All you have to do is vote for me, and it will be 100 percent different.’ It never is. Sanders and Trump are both benefiting.”

The results of Monday’s caucuses, which will take place in 1,681 precincts across Iowa, ride on such concrete factors as candidates’ get-out-the-vote efforts — but also on intangibles like voters’ perception of who is catching fire at the last minute, and even on the weather. A victory for Mr. Trump, who draws thousands to his rallies here, would devastate Mr. Cruz, who has deployed waves of volunteers and sought to visit all 99 counties in Iowa to mobilize evangelical Christians, the core of a conservative coalition that he has built along with Tea Partiers and libertarians.

“Ninety-three hours,” Mr. Cruz said at the end of the Republican debate on Thursday in Des Moines. “The media noise will soon be over, and it’s now for the men and women of Iowa to decide.”

A Trump victory would demonstrate that if the billionaire developer’s fans, a working-class demographic that is less inclined to vote, can navigate the byzantine caucus process, they are even more likely to turn out in the primary states that follow, where casting a ballot is easier.

“If Trump wins Iowa, it’s hard to see how he would not run the table,” said Douglas E. Gross, who was the Iowa finance chairman for George W. Bush’s re-election bid.

On the Democratic side, a victory by Hillary Clinton over a surging Mr. Sanders would banish doubts and set her more firmly on the road to the nomination. But a victory for Mr. Sanders would expose Mrs. Clinton’s vulnerabilities, uncork another stream of donations for Mr. Sanders and embolden his supporters, including minorities in Southern states that are supposed to be a Clinton firewall.

“Bernie speaks forcefully to the anxiety that both young people have and the middle class has,” said former Senator Tom Harkin, Iowa’s senior Democrat, who supports Mrs. Clinton like nearly all state party officials who publicly endorsed. “Hillary speaks to that, too, but she’s not as unique as Bernie Sanders, and in every election some people want the unique, the new, the untried.”

Mr. Harkin, who in his 30 years in Washington was one of the most left-wing senators, understands well the dynamic in his state, where four out of 10 Democrats described themselves in a recent poll as “socialist.”

Among Republicans, more than six in 10 described themselves as “devoutly religious” in the same poll, for The Des Moines Register.

Mr. Sanders, calling for a political “revolution,” embraced a criticism by former President Bill Clinton that he projected too much anger.

“I am angry,” Mr. Sanders said on the campaign trail. “The American people are angry.”

Whereas Mr. Sanders offers a New Deal-style menu of programs (and is sometimes vague on how to pay for them), Mr. Trump is light on policy substance, and his supporters have mainly responded to his stick-it-to-the-man style.

“Trump is willing to say whatever he believes in whether it offends someone or not because it’s the truth,” said Dakota Anderson, a Walmart worker, who listened raptly while Mr. Trump spoke in Davenport last month, after he called for a ban on Muslims entering the country.

Stuart Stevens, who was Mitt Romney’s top strategist in 2012, predicted a long campaign ahead for both parties because of the disruptive signals likely to emerge on Monday.

“We’re going to look back on Iowa in March and April, and it’s going to seem like the Crimean War,” he said. “This thing is just beginning.”