WASHINGTON — John Kerry has made no secret of his ambitions as secretary of state. On a visit to the Church of the Nativity in Bethlehem last March, he watched as two bearded patriarchs pleaded with President Obama to bring peace to the Holy Land. Clasping their hands, Mr. Kerry said, “I’m going to work as hard as I can to get it done.”

Eight months later, Mr. Kerry’s effort to broker peace between Israel and the Palestinians is still an uphill struggle. But he may be poised to begin delivering another major goal Mr. Obama has long sought: an agreement with Iran to curb its nuclear program.

If the United States and its five negotiating partners come within striking distance of an interim agreement with Iran, Mr. Kerry is likely to fly to Geneva at the end of the week to try to seal the deal. It would be a rare win for a White House that has been reeling from the botched rollout of the health care law, a stalled legislative agenda and doubts about Mr. Obama’s credibility.

It would also ratify Mr. Kerry’s status as the biggest surprise of the president’s second-term cabinet: a hyperactive diplomat who plunges into seemingly intractable problems, improvises furiously along the way — making gaffes from time to time, but occasionally devising solutions that have helped Mr. Obama out of messy situations like the impasse over a security agreement with Afghanistan.

None of this is to say that Mr. Kerry and Mr. Obama are personally close. With his patrician style and oratorical flourishes, Mr. Kerry is not a natural match for the president. Even now, his long-winded explanations — a legacy of his 28 years in the Senate — sometimes test Mr. Obama’s patience, though Mr. Kerry’s aides say he has “learned to speak the president’s language.”

But Mr. Kerry, current and former administration officials say, has won growing respect from Mr. Obama, who has tended to keep his cabinet secretaries at arm’s length and on a short leash. As the Iran talks heated up in recent weeks, officials said, the White House deferred to Mr. Kerry’s argument that he should thrust himself into the negotiations to try to bridge differences between Iran and the West.

“Kerry made the judgment about whether he could move the ball down the field,” said Benjamin J. Rhodes, a deputy national security adviser. “The president supported Kerry’s judgment.”

Once in Geneva, Mr. Kerry confronted resistance from French diplomats, who worried that the deal taking shape with Iran was too lenient. Conducting much of the negotiation in French, Mr. Kerry incorporated their points into the broader proposal, which still fell short of an agreement with the Iranians by what he later said were four or five phrases.

Mr. Kerry’s prodigious energy and desire to make a mark have made him a more activist secretary of state than his famous predecessor, Hillary Rodham Clinton, and so far at least, more willing to take risks than Mrs. Clinton, who may have another presidential campaign in her future. Aides say Mr. Obama has marveled at how he spent seven hours with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, negotiating the fine points of a peace deal with the Palestinians.

David Axelrod, an adviser to Mr. Obama, watched the two men in close quarters when Mr. Kerry played the part of Mitt Romney during the president’s debate prep sessions — and Mr. Kerry infuriated the president with his needling imitation of the Republican candidate.

“They may seem different, and they are different,” he said, “but they’ve cooperated closely and become friendly.”

Some of their differences, however, have played out in public. When Mr. Obama reversed course and decided not to order a military strike on Syria last August to punish it for a deadly chemical weapons attack, he did not bother to tell Mr. Kerry of his decision until after he had briefed his aides, even though Mr. Kerry had become the most public advocate of military action.

If Mr. Kerry was offended, he did not show it, throwing himself into the effort to flesh out and win support for a Russian-inspired plan to eliminate Syria’s chemical weapons stocks — a plan he had helped set in motion with a seemingly offhand remark at a news conference.

“He helped bail the president out of a no-win situation, in which he might have had to use force, with a divided country and Congress,” said Robert Danin, a former State Department official who has worked on the Middle East peace process. “It’s not Nixon and Kissinger. But Kerry’s actions have made him relevant to the White House.”

Mr. Obama’s aides also praise Mr. Kerry’s efforts to negotiate the postwar security deal with President Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan — an effort that required marathon talks between the two men but which Mr. Kerry said Wednesday was finally completed.

Still, Mr. Kerry’s overall record at the State Department is mixed: his Syria diplomacy, while face-saving for Mr. Obama, has left the United States woefully short of its stated goal of persuading President Bashar al-Assad to yield power.

To some analysts, his focus on a peace accord between the Israelis and Palestinians is quixotic, given the poor climate for a deal. Among leaders in the region, the perception is that this is very much his project: a diplomatic effort that the White House will fully embrace if it succeeds but that can be laid at Mr. Kerry’s doorstep if it fails.

Mr. Kerry’s indefatigable commitment is the biggest reason Mr. Obama listed Middle East peace as one of his top priorities in the region when he spoke at the United Nations in September. But the policy review that led to that speech also underscores the limits of Mr. Kerry’s role.

A major test will come at the Iran talks, which began Wednesday. Mr. Kerry has not been as deeply immersed in them as in Syria or the peace process. But when American negotiators flew to Geneva earlier this month, he began thinking about how he could make a difference. On Nov. 7, in the middle of a nine-day tour of the Middle East, he decided to take the plunge.

The move was classic Kerry. He did not go to Geneva calculating that an agreement was assured, but with the hope that his long ties with foreign ministers and negotiating stamina would at least enable him to narrow the differences with the Iranians.

For some longtime friends, Mr. Kerry’s headlong approach to diplomacy illustrates a larger truth about him. As Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican who shares with Mr. Kerry both a record of distinguished service in Vietnam and a failed run for the White House, put it, “I believe that for John Kerry the reality is often as he wishes rather than as it actually is.”