AMSTERDAM, N.Y. — Susan Phemister assumed it would be easy to flip a castle.

She and her husband, Manfred, had been flipping real estate in zip-zip fashion since the mid-1990s, and had made a killing each time. In 1997, while working in London, they bought a condo for $170,000 and sold it the next year for $245,000. In 1999, they bought again, for $285,000, and sold a year later for $350,000. Then they moved back to New York, bought a three-bedroom place in Park Slope, Brooklyn, for $565,000 and four years later, in 2005, sold it for $1 million.

That’s when the Phemisters decided the time was right to buy a castle — a 36,000-square-footer in classic red brick, complete with 2 turrets and 134 windows — for sale at what appeared to be the low-low price of $800,000. They spent $400,000 on renovations, which won them a preservation award, and in 2007 put it back on the market at a price fit for a king, $2 million.

“The plan was for the family to live here for two years,” said Ms. Phemister, a media executive and mother of three. “Then we’d sell and make the extra million we’d need to buy a brownstone.”

Unfortunately, as is now widely known, that was when the American economy took a downward turn, and, as Ms. Phemister said, “The market for castles in upstate New York dried up completely.”

In the five years since, the castle has been taken off the market and put back on several times — for $1.95 million, $1.25 million fully furnished (including a mounted bison head and 20 stuffed pheasants), $1 million and now, for $895,000.

And yet, even at 2005 prices, it remains the Phemisters’ castle.

“We love living here,” Ms. Phemister said. “It’s just that it’s someone else’s turn to live in a castle.”

In many ways there is nothing different about the Phemisters’ experience from what has happened to millions of other middle-aged Americans who benefited from a generation of upwardly trending real estate prices only to wake one morning, and, in an awful moment of truth, realize that they had pushed their luck once too often.

But the fact that it is a castle, rather than, say, a high ranch, is a reminder of how big Americans allowed themselves to dream during the boom times and how long the consequences have lingered.

For the record, the castle is the Amsterdam Armory, built in 1894 by the state for military training, though no one around here calls it anything but the castle, nor would any real estate broker hoping for a 6 percent commission ever say, “A man’s home is his National Guard armory.”

From the beginning, the Phemisters understood that flipping a castle would require an elaborate plan.

She took a corporate job that would assure benefits and a guaranteed income (a vice president for Thomson Reuters).

Mr. Phemister, 55, has his own business — CD music distribution — which allows him to work out of the castle while anchoring life for their three children, now ages 12, 11 and 9.

“Our whole life is a cost-benefit analysis,” said Ms. Phemister, who is 47.

On Mondays, she is often out of bed before 4 a.m. to drive the 30 minutes from here to Albany. Then she rides the train two and a half hours south to Pennsylvania Station, so she can be at her desk by 7:30. She spends three days in New York, renting rooms in people’s homes for $50 a night. Wednesdays, she is on the 4:40 p.m. back to Albany and for the rest of the week works from the castle. “I love that I can be up at 6 a.m., walking the dog around the castle and answering messages on my phone,” she said.

Mr. Phemister has 100,000 CDs taking up thousands of square feet of the castle basement. (It would not be fair to say “dungeon,” since there are lots of windows and the Phemisters do not torture anyone, except, given their long days, themselves).

It wasn’t just the real estate collapse that made castle life so exhausting.

As the music industry shifted from CDs to online downloads, Mr. Phemister’s business shrank by half.

To make up the income, they rented out the castle to TV crews (HGTV’s “You Live in What?”) and filmmakers. For the movie “American General,” a documentary about Benedict Arnold, the director used the castle’s 10,000-square-foot gymnasium to restage the Battles of Saratoga.

But that income was not dependable, so a few years ago they started a bed-and-breakfast, which, they say, brings in $60,000 a year. The only problem is that to maximize revenue, it is run entirely by Mr. and Mrs. Phemister, neither of whom truly needs another job.

Indeed, Mr. Phemister already has another job, coaching youth soccer.

So instead of the castle working for the Phemisters, the Phemisters are working for the castle.

Last year the castle was one of eight buildings — including the TWA terminal at Kennedy Airport — to win an excellence award from the Preservation League of New York State.

There have been several potential buyers, including a man who was looking for a good place to store his taxidermy collection; a medieval re-enactment group; and a software executive interested in using it as a country retreat and data center.

A man who owns a military museum and antiques store spent four days visiting but ultimately decided against it because his wife did not want to leave California.

When Ms. Phemister talks to people about the joys of castle life, they often roll their eyes and say, “Sure it’s great to live in a castle, but what about the heating bills?” Not as bad as they might be. By setting up a zone heating system, they were able to hold the 2012 utility bills — electric, gas, oil and water — to $13,076.25, though on the coldest winter days, everyone wears a hoodie and loads up on hot cocoa.

Taxes last year were $17,532.87, about half of what homeowners in the wealthiest suburbs of Westchester County pay for noncastle residences.

In the end, people can find a million reasons not to buy a castle: Some have complained that there is not enough parking, others would prefer a castle that is deep in the woods. The fact is, the only reason to buy a castle is that you have a terrible yearning to live in a castle. “It’s the supercool factor,” Ms. Phemister said.

The Phemister children are too young to remember Brooklyn, so castle life seems normal to them. They have friends over for dodge ball tournaments in the gym, sleepovers in the turrets, hide-and-seek in dimly lighted passageways.

They are known around town as the castle children, which is mostly — but not totally — a good thing. “Sometimes,” says Vivienne, who is in the sixth grade, “people just want to be my friend because I live in a castle.”