When Elizabeth Gilbert was in fourth grade, her teacher, Ms. Sandie Carpenter, announced a fund-raiser. Students were asked to sell grinders — New Englandese for “sub sandwiches” — to pay for a class trip. There was never any question whether Gilbert would participate. Still, door-to-door sales of a perishable foodstuff can prove intimidating, even to a zealous 9-year-old.

So her mother, Carole, initiated a training program. She made Gilbert go outside and close the front door. Gilbert then had to knock, introduce herself and explain what she was selling and why. “Our family’s going on vacation next week,” Carole might announce. “What if we want the grinders two weeks from now?” To which Gilbert would generally respond, “I don’t know!” and start crying. “Back it up,” her mother would say. “Try it again. Get it right, kid.” And close the door.

They did this, Gilbert recalls, for what felt like a whole afternoon.

A decade and a half later, Gilbert took an elevator up to the offices of Spin magazine to ask for a job. Her only connection at the magazine was having met the publisher, Bob Guccione Jr., at a party once. She had no experience as a journalist — her degree from N.Y.U. was in international relations — and enough good sense to be terrified. The doors to the elevator opened. Gilbert took a deep breath. Come on, she told herself. You’re Carole Gilbert’s daughter. Go do this!

The receptionist was, to put it gently, unmoved by her appeal. A concerned secretary appeared, then a personal assistant. Gilbert politely refused to budge. Guccione eventually agreed to see her but had no recollection of having met her. Look, he said finally, my assistant is going out of town for three days. You can do his job. At the end of this stint, Guccione pulled out his wallet, handed Gilbert 300 bucks and wished her good luck.

Some months later, Gilbert placed her first short story in Esquire, which published it with the subtitle “the debut of an American writer.” She sent the story to Guccione with a note that read, “I told you I was a writer!” He called and offered her an assignment on the spot.

The lesson was obvious. Life was just a big grinder sale. Your job was to knock on the door and not to leave until your ambitions were met.

Next month, Viking will publish Gilbert’s sixth book, a novel titled “The Signature of All Things.” It is her first work of fiction in 13 years and unlike anything she has ever written. The book’s heroine is Alma Whittaker, the brilliant, restless daughter of an imperious botanical explorer. Its prose has the elegant sheen of a 19th-century epic, but its concerns — the intersection of science and faith, the feminine struggle for fulfillment, the dubious rise of the pharmaceutical industry — are essentially modern.

What sets Gilbert, 44, apart from other novelists, of course, is that she’s best known in the world at large as the author of “Eat, Pray, Love,” an account of her spiritual journey from depression to enlightenment spiced by its exotic locales. The 2006 memoir sold a gazillion copies, spawned a movie starring Julia Roberts, made Gilbert the unwitting guru to her predominantly female fans and more or less devoured her literary reputation.

Despite having spent the first decade of her career writing three critically acclaimed books, critics cast her as a pampered solipsist peddling self-help. “Even worse — chick lit, if you really want to get ghetto,” Gilbert says. “What little respect I clawed my way to, I totally erased.”

Her overriding concern in those years, though, was living up to her own professed grace. She received mountains of letters from anguished fans and for a time tried to answer every one personally. And she struggled with the crushing expectations that acclaim bequeaths. “The biggest thing I had to prove was, ‘Is she going to be able to come out of this tsunami and ever do anything again?’ Or am I going to Harper Lee out? Go J. D. Salinger for the rest of my life?”

She began researching a novel about the Amazon but abandoned it after her lover Jose Nunes — the sexy Brazilian gem trader known as Felipe in “Eat, Pray, Love” — was deported. The only way Nunes would be allowed to return to the States was if Gilbert married him, an unsettling prospect given the haunting failure of her first marriage. To sort out her complicated feelings about matrimony, Gilbert resolved to write about the subject. As a midlist author, she’d rarely felt self-conscious at the keyboard. As a cultural icon, the pressures of undertaking another memoir activated her most primal fear: that she would disappoint people. “Committed” wound up being her most arduous project. When it was published, in 2010, she felt more apprehension than elation. “I threw it out into the world like a grenade. I was like, ‘All right, everybody, whatever you have to say about the last book, whatever resentment you’ve built up over the last few years, let’s just catharsis it out and move on.’ And it did that.”

Gilbert had withstood the narcissistic onslaught of fame, found stability in her personal life and laid claim to the biggest prize of all: the feeling that she had nothing to lose with her next project. She wasn’t about to waste the opportunity writing “a thinly veiled autobiographical story about a young woman’s vague sense of dread.”

Instead, Gilbert has returned to her roots in fiction and written the sort of rip-roaring tale that would have been considered entertainment for the masses 150 years ago. The challenge she faces now is how to sell the pleasures of old-fashioned storytelling to masses who hunger for more personal disclosure. Millions of readers love Elizabeth Gilbert. The question is: Will they love her imagination?

To those who have followed Gilbert’s trajectory, the abiding oddity of her career is that she began it as one of the boys. She took her cues from Hemingway, whose collection “In Our Time” convinced her that writers find stories not in a seminar room but by investigating the world. After college, she roamed the country taking jobs like trail cook and bartender. Then — again, think Hemingway — she turned to journalism.

It was immediately obvious that she had the knack. Veteran editors still talk with reverence about articles she wrote two decades ago. She traveled to China for Spin and filed a story about the Three Gorges Dam that read like a dispatch from Hunter S. Thompson’s kid sister: sad, funny and surreal. Gilbert soon joined GQ, becoming one of the few women on staff, an arrangement that suited her. She thought nothing of plopping down next to Art Cooper, GQ’s famously macho editor, to pitch him stories as he downed his 5 o’clock vodka. The body of work she amassed — profiles of rebels and daredevils, mostly — composed a sustained investigation of masculinity. She went so far as to dress in drag and live as a man for a week.

These preoccupations seeped into her fiction. The women in her 1997 story collection, “Pilgrims,” make a habit of invading male sanctums, and Ruth Thomas, the heroine of her first novel, “Stern Men,” is determined to infiltrate the crusty fraternity of Maine lobstermen. In “The Last American Man,” Gilbert documented the turbulent life of Eustace Conway, a self-made naturalist who abandoned the false comforts of suburbia for a life in the wild. The book, an ingenious amalgam of biography and cultural analysis, was a finalist for the National Book Award in 2002. She figured it would be her commercial breakthrough.

It is not lost on Gilbert that, even as her insights into men propelled her career, her romantic relationships with them continued to implode. She was hungry for sensual experience but had, in her own delicate phrase, “a delayed sense of consequence.” The end of her first marriage, followed by a toxic affair, sent her reeling into a depression.

Journalism and fiction had allowed Gilbert to play the role of invisible observer. She now presented her editor at Viking, Paul Slovak, what he calls “one of the most incredible proposals we’d ever seen in publishing,” a distillation of her personal crisis with a radical plan to sell all her possessions and travel abroad. She framed the project as an effort to balance her pursuit of pleasure with a spiritual life. It would be more accurate to describe “Eat, Pray, Love” as a coming-out story. After a decade spent writing for and about men, Gilbert turned her focus inward, toward the pain and yearning she felt as a woman.

The memoir became an Oprah-sanctified franchise in part because it was a wish fantasy. Rather than immerse readers in the therapeutic labors that allowed her to leave her husband, she took them on a walkabout full of pasta, prayer and mind-blowing sex. But the book also spoke to the unconscious desires and anxieties of women who felt trapped by marriage and motherhood and desperate to find another path to contentment.

“Committed” marked an even deeper effort to reckon with the societal ideals imposed on women. The most moving portions of the book detail the sacrifices made by the women in Gilbert’s own family, including her mother’s decision to abandon her career in deference to her husband’s. In this context, it becomes easier to see why Carole Gilbert pushed her daughter so hard to become self-reliant.

Gilbert is honored to call herself a feminist. “I’m appalled that the word has become something people flinch before they say. More than being a feminist, I’m like the winner of feminism. I won the results of their work.”

Consider the efforts that went into producing “The Signature of All Things.” Gilbert spent three and a half years on research alone. She hopscotched the globe, enlisted the aid of a dozen experts, then granted herself the right to run wild with the plot. The result is a rousing homage to the literary heroes she grew up reading. “I just wanted to play with the people I love the most — Dickens, the Brontës, Eliot, James,” Gilbert says. “I wanted to jump around in their world. It was fun as hell to set the bar that high.”

At the center of her tale is Alma Whittaker, an interloper in the masculine realm of science and a woman who — at the bidding of her mother — finds redemption by means of her own intellectual achievement. A woman, that is, a lot like Elizabeth Gilbert. Alma hurls herself into a world of adventure yet struggles with an equally tumultuous internal life: family loyalty, carnal impulses, marital heartbreak. And like Gilbert, she is an intensely driven woman whose sense of destiny derives from an unorthodox upbringing.

In 1973, John and Carole Gilbert moved to a derelict farmhouse that sat on three acres outside the prosperous town of Litchfield, Conn. They dreamed of opening a Christmas-tree farm that would eventually pay the college tuition of their two daughters. This was, by most American standards, a cockamamie scheme. John was employed full time as a chemical engineer at Uniroyal. Carole was helping to establish a Planned Parenthood clinic, a trailblazer in the battle for women’s reproductive rights. Liz was 4 years old at the time.

But the rigor and rhythms of rural life appealed to John and to Carole, who grew up on a farm. Although the homestead was located on a major highway a mile from the local country club, the family was soon growing their own food, keeping chickens and bees and washing their hair in rain barrels.

Friends loved to sleep over. The girls had baby goats, which they helped birth themselves, and a room full of costumes. Carole was the kind of mom who organized neighborhood treasure hunts and made the world’s best pancakes. John was a joker who might appear at the breakfast table wearing a bra over his work shirt.

As playful as they could be, the Gilberts were not hippies. They were modern pioneers whose embrace of Calvinistic virtues bordered on fanatical. “My parents are the only people I’ve ever known who made their own goat’s-milk yogurt and voted for Reagan twice,” Gilbert notes. “That’s a Venn diagram that doesn’t include anyone else.”

Like many people whose lives have grown more luxurious than their origins, Gilbert is practiced in the art of rendering the privations of her youth as a comic monologue. She talks a lot about what it was like to grow up in a home with no television and no heat aside from a wood-burning stove that warmed only two rooms. But she is acutely aware of the literary advantages her childhood bestowed.

“When Malcolm Gladwell talks about the 10,000 hours you need for proficiency, I had that by the time I was 8 probably. All we did was make up stories and live them out.” The Gilbert girls read constantly — it was the one leisure activity not considered idling — and fought over the typewriter their father brought home from work. They bound their own books and drew author portraits with bios. “The only thing missing was a quote from Gore Vidal.”

For Gilbert, writing was not just a badge but a shield. Within the intense ecosystem of her family, she often felt helpless and overly sensitive. Her mother would follow her around the house, making sure she practiced her piano and finished her chores. She did a lot of crying. But she got with the program. “I was the baby of the family, but I was never babied, and that allowed me to take whatever artistic temperament I had and apply learned discipline. I was taught how to work. I think that’s everything. Creativity and imagination alone are not going to get you there.”

Gilbert lives in Frenchtown, N.J. — a gussied-up former mill town — at the end of a gravel drive in a pale yellow Victorian filled with artifacts from her travels. When she and Nunes moved in five years ago, the house was surrounded by a groomed lawn. A previous owner had chopped down the majestic oak out front to build a circular driveway. Almost at once, Gilbert became consumed with reseeding the property. The house is now flanked by tiered beds of Echinacea, sunflowers, forsythia and tiger lilies, which rise above and around numerous stone Buddhas. The circular driveway has become a meadow of blazing yellow wildflowers.

Seated in her screened-in porch, with a ginger tabby named Zipper perched on her lap, Gilbert concedes that the compulsion to garden took her unawares. She attributes the urge to her bloodlines. “I come from a long line of women who are good in the soil.”

As a writer, Gilbert subscribes to the notion that finding your next project is a scavenger hunt. You’re always looking for clues. She briefly considered writing a nonfiction book about gardening but found herself more compelled by the provenance of various plant species.

As she was researching this, she came into possession of another clue: a 1784 edition of Captain Cook’s “Voyages Round the World” that had been in the family for generations. She and her sister, Catherine, worshiped the book as kids. In fact, at age 4 Gilbert scrawled her name in the book, ruining its value to collectors. Whether or not this act of vandalism was also an act of foresight, the gentle reader shall have to decide. The result was the same. Her mother handed her the book, and Gilbert felt a jolt of electricity run up her arm.

She spent the next six months poring over the volume. Her mind kept circling back to Sir Joseph Banks, the botanist who accompanied Cook. She and Banks were, she realized, engaged in the same pursuit: botanical exploration. As it happens, botany was one of the few scientific areas open to women in the 19th century, at least to those who tended to be wealthy, childless and related to a famous scientist. From these raw criteria, Alma Whittaker began to take shape.

The next hurdle Gilbert faced was writing a novel set in the past. She was worried she’d fall into the trap of writing self-consciously dated prose. “Candlesticky” is the word she uses. She read “Wolf Hall,” Hilary Mantel’s 640-page novel about Thomas Cromwell, three times before the solution dawned on her. Mantel had written a contemporary novel about the 16th century. Gilbert didn’t have to pretend to be George Eliot. She could be herself writing about the 19th century.

This freed her, for example, to delve into Alma’s sexual life, which she does with gusto. The book includes torrid passages of faux Victorian pornography, and Alma emerges as a first-rate explorer of her own anatomy.

To capture the tone of her characters’ speech, Gilbert spent a year reading almost nothing written after 1890. She focused on private letters, the sort dashed off under duress. “That’s when you could really see the person behind them, because they didn’t have time to worry about how it was going to make them look. They’re e-mails, basically.”

The final question she confronted was what Alma Whittaker would study. Moss quickly became a candidate. Then she came across a line in one of her moss books that compared a particular species to Darwin’s finches. Here was proof positive that Alma’s focus on an unsung, miniature world could lead to a giant scientific revelation. “I almost started barking,” Gilbert recalls, rising out of her chair. “I was like: Ahhhh! There it is! There it is! The final clue.”

This might explain why Gilbert is so amped up as we approach the home of Dave Benner, a k a the Moss Man. A former ornamental-horticulture professor, Benner is the world’s foremost advocate of moss as a replacement for the common lawn. That he lives 15 miles down the road from Gilbert can only be called fate. “I might really geek out here, dude,” she says, practically leaping out of her Honda S.U.V.

She spends the next two hours trailing Benner around his property. Together, they inspect every single variety of ground cover, from lakes of spongy iridescent moss to lavender patches of Quaker-ladies, from tasseled ferns to a pygmy hemlock whose crown has been assiduously trimmed to look like a friar’s tonsure. Gilbert keeps saying things like: “Hibiscus at that height? You’re out of control, Dave!”

Benner is particularly eager to show off an ivylike shrub called gymnaster that a friend of his, now deceased, smuggled to the States from an island off the coast of Japan — in his underwear. “I may be the only person in the United States with this species. It’s amazing when you think about it.”

The pair reach a little clearing, and Gilbert settles onto the ground. “This is a wonderful world you’ve made,” she tells the Moss Man. It’s midafternoon before she can tear herself away. “That was, like, the best thing that’s ever happened to me,” she says. “Don’t you love an obsessive?”

By the time Gilbert arrives back in Frenchtown, she’s famished. Lunch at her favorite local eatery, a bustling farm-to-table cafe called the Lovin’ Oven, begins with a side order of bacon and sliced avocado, then proceeds to a second side of bacon, three fish tacos, two slices of chocolate-and-sea-salt-caramel tart and a Snickers bar (off menu).

In her defense, Gilbert shared the tart. Also, before she could actually sit down to eat, she’d been detained by a dozen friends, ranging from a local hypnotherapist seeking book recommendations to a woman applying henna tattoos on the sidewalk. Such is the hazard of being Frenchtown’s most visible and chatty civic booster.

Rather than seeking seclusion — the assumed inclination of artists beset by fame — Gilbert has sought to reshape her hometown into a community that suits her fancy and reflects her values. She persuaded the owners of the Lovin’ Oven, for example, to move from a nearby town into a former electronics factory she bought and had renovated. Friends also own the adjoining art gallery and a Pilates studio. Most of the building is occupied by Two Buttons, a cavernous bazaar run by Nunes and crammed with handcrafted esoterica from Indonesia. The vibe is communal; the prices are retail.

When she’s not traveling, Gilbert surrounds herself with old friends, an increasing number of whom she’s persuaded to move to Frenchtown. Her lunch companions today include Bill Miller, a photographer she met while tending bar at Coyote Ugly, an East Village watering hole she wrote about years ago. Her article later inspired a risible film of the same name. Miller is among the select company who witnessed Gilbert clear the room at closing time by climbing atop the bar and using a broom to sweep the drinks of unsuspecting patrons into the wall.

Also on hand for the pigout is her best friend, Rayya Elias. Gilbert showed up at her apartment a dozen years ago in dire need of a haircut. “She had this nasty little ’fro,” Elias says. “It looked like Art Garfunkel’s hair.”

“It was like a topiary,” Gilbert clarifies.

Elias served as a confidante during the dissolution of her first marriage and later traveled to London to play fairy godmother/stylist to Gilbert, who was exhausted from months of touring. Together, they attended the British film premiere of “Eat, Pray, Love” and hung out with Julia Roberts. (Gilbert: “It’s stupid how beautiful she is. It’s like getting clubbed on an ice floe.”)

A few years ago, when Elias endured her own nasty divorce, Gilbert invited her out to Frenchtown to live in a house she’d purchased. Gilbert’s only rent demand? A draft of the memoir she’d been urging Elias to write for years — due in nine months. “Harley Loco,” Elias’s account of punk rock and addiction, came out in April, with an introduction by her landlord.

“My surprising wealth coincided with the housing crash, so it worked out,” Gilbert explains. “Everybody was able to get a house.” She’s only half joking. Several other artist pals have benefited from her largess. She manages this potentially fraught form of patronage deftly, though it’s taken some trial and error. Early on in the windfall era, she fell into the trap of trying to save people or push them onto paths she felt they should follow. “I deeply regret having inserted myself and my money into some people’s lives so thunderously and often unwisely.”

After lunch, we pay Gilbert’s husband a quick visit in his office. Perhaps because he was a major character in both of her memoirs, Nunes, a gracious man of 61, has shied away from media attention in the past. But he’s eager to discuss his wife’s new novel, for which he served as something of a muse. “One of the greatest pleasures of our marriage was for me to come back from work and get a glass of wine and listen to her read what she wrote each day.”

“I read him every word of the book,” Gilbert confirms. “I think that’s why it went so fast. I had to keep the story going because Jose was waiting for the next part. It was almost like writing a serialization.” After so many years of research, she wrote the novel in a four-month burst, and the prose mirrors her exuberance.

“I would listen and say to myself, ‘Where does she find these things?’ ” Nunes shakes his head then gazes at his wife. “How did you come up with these ideas, love?”

Gilbert spends the rest of the afternoon drifting down the Delaware River with Elias on an inner tube. She tells stories about the guys who broke her heart in college, and after college, and about her skinflint forebears, who supposedly sold George Washington the boats to make his famous crossing of the Delaware. Sadly, the Weiner Boat — an enterprise that sells folks hot dogs as they pass — has quit for the day. But when we come ashore downstream, Gilbert is thrilled to discover the Weiner Boat docked. She reaches through the railing, grabs the walkie-talkie and hollers into it, for no apparent reason, “We got an empty boat here!”

Charm always is a bit of a racket, as Saul Bellow observes. But Gilbert’s magnetism derives from a genuine source, what her friend Paul Holdengräber calls “a deep-rooted moral ambition for joy.”

Gilbert herself has no patience for those who subscribe to the myth that misery and madness enhance creativity. She feels no nostalgia for the upheaval that generated her memoirs and views her new novel as evidence that she works best when her life is in balance. Writers have a duty to confront the darkness within themselves at the keyboard. But they have an equal duty, she argues, not to romanticize their sorrow or inflict it on those around them. She describes the most important part of her spiritual practice as a daily effort to cultivate compassion. A ghostly tattoo of the word runs along her left forearm, like a palimpsest.

This attitude, which can scan as New Age-y, has made Gilbert a magnet for derision, particularly among “serious” authors and critics who assume that the popularity of “Eat, Pray, Love” speaks to its superficiality, and by extension the author’s.

Gilbert sees the quest for literary status as a narcissistic trap. “The big munga munga thing for writers is: ‘What are they going to say? What are they going to think of me? Am I going to be invited into the club? Am I going to be honored? Am I going to be given awards?’ I’m less interested in who’s including me than in who I’m including.”

Among friends, she’ll joke about the dread she feels when she spots a fervent lurker at one of her readings. But even during the heyday of her celebrity, when hard-core “Lizbians” haunted Frenchtown hoping for an audience, Gilbert remained shockingly unguarded. “They’d tell me they felt like they knew me, ha-ha-ha, and I’d say that’s not your fault, that’s my fault. I wrote two memoirs and told you everything about myself.”

The only time I saw Gilbert lose her equanimity, in fact, was discussing her fans. She detests the mind-set that certain readers are more desirable than others. “It’s the worst kind of arrogance. Shouldn’t the idea be that we want people to read, period? Isn’t it an honor if somebody chooses our books at all, whatever her background, whatever her education, whatever her level of perceived literary credentials?” She recalls meeting a woman in a Tulsa Barnes & Noble — “probably 65 years old, looked like an aging country singer with sad eyes” — who told her “Eat, Pray, Love” was the first book she’d read in her life, and she now understood why people read. “So if that’s the kind of reader I’m not supposed to want, well, Jesus Christ. Give me a few thousand more of those!”

Now that people have started telling her that “The Signature of All Things” will attract “a different level of reader,” she can’t help hearing the implicit slight in this praise: “You might be lucky enough to get out of your ghetto, now that you’ve found a better grade of readers, meaning male readers. I want to say: ‘Go [expletive] yourself! You have no idea who the women are who read my books, and if I have to choose between them and you, I’m choosing them.’ ”

Which is why you won’t catch her whining about the mammoth book tour that lies ahead. “I want to bring this book to people and ask if they’ll read it, and I feel like I have to ask them personally. I gotta sell those grinders, man.”

Eventually, once she’s finished knocking on doors, Gilbert will return to what remains ground zero for her creative life, the attic space she calls her Skybrary.

It is a spacious, low-ceilinged aerie filled with books and relics and secret compartments. There is a bed in one corner for naps. There is a pilgrim’s kimono from Japan. There is that ancient edition of Captain Cook’s “Voyages,” bound in leather and as regal as billed. There is a 15-foot slab of polished acacia that serves as her desk. If the 10-year-old Elizabeth Gilbert could have designed a work space, it would look exactly like this, right down to the built-in bookshelves, which appear to send out tendrils that trace the walls and wind around the pillars like vines.

Lined up in another corner are boxes that contain the thousands of index cards compiled during her research, meticulously annotated and filed. The notes scribbled on them are the building blocks she uses to develop the themes, characters, scenes and structures of her books. She learned this method from Mr. Kisco, her ninth-grade Western Civilization teacher.

Gilbert, naturally, is most excited about the secret compartments. “That’s the problem with being a natural memoirist,” she says. “Whenever anyone comes up, I say, ‘Let me show you my secret compartments!’ ” She reaches into a drawer and slides a metal frog along its back edge. Out pops a second drawer, inside of which is a tiny code book she and a friend used to write covert notes when they were 7.

Known among her Litchfield friends as an ardent historian and archivist, Gilbert still has copies of the school papers she wrote as a kid — at least the ones that received A’s. She has programs from high-school plays, profanely inscribed by the members of her artsy crew, who called themselves Team Muff Dive. She has the rejection letter she received from Columbia. (“Wanna send them that?”) And tucked on a shelf behind her desk, beside the moss-covered bust of Alma Whittaker made by an artist friend, is the very first clue on the scavenger hunt that led her to write “The Signature of All Things”: a handmade booklet titled “Plant Science.”

It was composed 35 years ago. That same fourth-grade teacher, Ms. Carpenter, brought a different houseplant into class every day for a month. Gilbert set down a description of each one — botanical name, propagation requirements, native habitat — the exact sort of taxonomic catalog that Alma compiles as a child.

But there’s one more artifact in her Skybrary that strikes me as an even more significant clue. It’s an original play Gilbert wrote the following year that was staged for her entire school, an event she vividly recalls as her first literary success. Like all things Gilbert, “Mona’s Proof ” is both wildly ambitious and personally revelatory. The play is about a young girl who has the extraordinary power to travel through time. Her parents don’t believe her, a problem she expounds upon in the production’s only song, “Nobody Believes Me, Nobody Cares.”

It doesn’t take a psychoanalyst to notice the parallels. By her own reckoning, Gilbert grew up in a home where she often felt overlooked and underestimated. She had an intimidating older sister and parents who continually pressed her to perform tasks she wasn’t good at and didn’t enjoy. From this well of insecurity would emerge her fascination with heroic figures as well as her own preternatural need for regard.

The play ends happily, after the heroine returns with a newspaper from the 1800s. It’s hard not to view “The Signature of All Things” as a long-awaited sequel, the indisputably authentic document the author needed to write to arrive at her literary destiny.

“I went back in time and brought back the evidence,” Gilbert says, staring down at the world’s only extant copy of “Mona’s Proof.” In a rare moment of unguarded pride, she permits herself a grin. “Dude, I crushed it.”