In China, we have an old saying: “tian gao, huangdi yuan,” or, “the emperor is as far away as the sky.” We use it to reassure ourselves that in a country that is so big, with so many people, we can lose only so much freedom — the central government can’t monitor everyone.

During my childhood in Shanghai in the 1990s, China thought of itself as working toward the so-called Singapore model. In middle school, my teacher told us that Singapore was a rich and beautiful country with an efficient, corruption-free government, and that China would be too, someday. I learned this model had a dark side only when I went to college, and a professor in international relations explained that Singapore was an authoritarian state, where the government wielded tremendous control over citizens’ daily lives.

Even so, the idea that China would ever see either the best or the worst of the Singapore model seemed impossible. Singapore was a tiny city-state, with a population of less than six million; in China, tian gao, huangdi yuan. Today, however, it doesn’t seem so ridiculous: The emperor walks among us.

It’s hard to say when I first became conscious of the idea that my privacy might be compromised. In 2010, when I graduated from college, I remember feeling optimistic about what the internet could offer. Books and movies that had once been banned in China for political reasons could be downloaded from 115 Wangpan, then the most popular Chinese cloud storage service. People talked about politics, albeit under pseudonyms, on forums like Tianya and Xici Hutong. Soon we had Weibo, the Chinese equivalent of Twitter. Whenever some sort of domestic scandal occurred, we could follow the commentary posted by public intellectuals there, so we wouldn’t have to simply accept the government’s narrative.

At the time, I felt that all this social media would help us form a true public sphere, that it would push China toward democracy and freedom of speech. I had so much faith in the future of my country that I quit a master’s program in Britain in 2011. I couldn’t wait to go back home; I believed it was poised to become a place where idealists like me would thrive.

Looking back now, I realize that things had already started to change. In 2008, a few months before the Beijing Olympics, riots erupted in Lhasa, the Tibetan regional capital. The following year, unrest broke out in Urumqi, the capital city of Xinjiang, with reports of minority Uighurs targeting Han Chinese for violence. These episodes prompted an escalation of security checks around the country. Shortly before the Shanghai World Expo in 2010, security checks were instituted in the subway system. We grew used to policemen checking people’s identity cards in interchange stations.

Over the next couple of years, the Weibo accounts of influential public figures started being shut down. We would hear stories about people saying things in WeChat groups, then being detained by the police, often on charges of disturbing the social order. Those stories would then disappear from the internet, making it impossible to know what had really happened.

I came to the United States for a master’s degree in 2016, and I am not sure whether the experience of living overseas has increased my sensitivity about matters of privacy or not. I do remember waking up one morning in 2017 to a story that had gone viral in my WeChat feeds overnight: “A BBC reporter challenged China’s surveillance network — and it took only seven minutes to capture him!” I couldn’t tell which terrified me more: China’s all-encompassing network of facial recognition surveillance cameras, or that my countrymen were proudly cheering them on.

Last spring, I went back to China for a book tour that took me to six cities. Entering train stations felt like crossing border control at an international airport — my identity was not only confirmed by someone checking my documents, but also by one of the ubiquitous facial recognition cameras. One day, while a friend was driving me home after a reading in Shanghai, I saw one of them ahead of us on the highway. Well, we can no longer do “bad” things, he said, noticing my discomfort. It was supposed to be a joke, but we fell into a long, dead silence.

Many people in China seem to be happy about the physical security promised by the surveillance network. Our mind-set, long ago, was wired to see safety and freedom as an either-or choice. I remember a conversation I had during my first year in the United States, when I was visiting Chicago. A Chinese student told me he dared not walk alone in the city after 5 p.m. When I told him I’d recently taken a trip to a nearby 7-Eleven at 10 p.m. by myself to get a beer, he was shocked. “Why?” I asked him. “It’s a safe neighborhood.” Still pale, he said, “You only got lucky.”

The disappearance in June 2017 of Yingying Zhang, a young Chinese visiting scholar, from the Urbana-Champaign campus of the University of Illinois only reinforced this sense of danger everywhere outside China. Her kidnapping by a former graduate student made headlines across the country. The post that got the most shares in my WeChat feeds the week she disappeared was titled, “When you come to the States, leave behind feelings of homegrown safety. ”

The other reason that my people seem not to worry about the violation of their privacy is that they believe they are law-abiding citizens. “Only criminals need to be afraid,” they say. But I’ve heard other stories.

In 2018, Wang Qian, a young single mother from Zhejiang Province, hanged herself after she lost her savings on a peer-to-peer lending platform called PPMiao. In her suicide note, which briefly appeared on social media, she confessed her frustrations: Because she’d been a victim of a financial fraud — and therefore had grievances — she was now considered a threat to public safety and order.

She said that she, as well as hundreds of other victims who’d tried to stage protests over their treatment, had been beaten by the police. One month before her suicide, investors like her who’d lost their money had planned a rally in Beijing — but only a few managed to show up, because policemen and security guards had gathered on every street corner and at subway stations to check the identity cards of everyone who was nearing Beijing’s financial district. The protest, like most of the other protests in China, was never reported in domestic news outlets.

But maybe Ms. Wang’s story seems irrelevant to the average person, or at least not cause for alarm. Many who lost money in similar schemes have opted to eat their losses rather than risk trouble; those who haven’t shake their heads smugly, and blame others for lending money in the first place, under schemes that should have seemed too good to be true.

More interestingly and perhaps sadly too, the idea of tian gao, huangdi yuan has been replaced by its opposite. We have such a large population, my countrymen now say, if we don’t keep a watch on them, there’s no guarantee of safety. What once seemed unrealistic is made possible by technology, and justified in the name of security.

And nowadays, no one talks about the Singapore model anymore. They talk about the China model.